---
layout: post
title: "Epilogue: The Memory of Medieval Women"
description: 
image: assets/images/jelling-pano.jpg
nav-menu: false
---


Despite the knowns and unknowns about her life, and despite Sven Aggesen’s and Saxo Grammaticus’s historical desires, Thyra was probably not some singularly spectacular creature whose ethereal woman-ness and unprecedented political faculties excelled all others in Scandinavia. The overall trajectory of Thyra’s story is not a wholly unique one in the realm of academic scholarship pertaining to medieval women. To begin to uncover and attempt to understand who they were, it is essential to explore how medieval women have been historically conceptualized in the past, and this grounding can thus inform novel or refocused interpretations for the present and future. Combining the lenses of materiality and memory is an extremely useful analytical tool with which to illuminate the lives of women who may not have been depicted in historically traditional mediums, such as chronicles, histories, law codes, and other written content. These lenses are particularly valuable when written texts were not a culturally significant mode of knowledge dissemination, as in certain pre-Christian societies and cultures like those of those Viking Age Nordic regions. Indeed, Thyra’s own extended dynastic line offers two examples where this kind of analysis can be further explored.

In 1835 a bog body was discovered outside of Vejle, not far from Jelling. Almost immediately, the woman’s body was identified as that of Thyra and Gorm’s supposed daughter, Gunnhild (ca. 910–ca. 980) a queen of Norway, who, according to Jómsvíkinga saga and the Historia Norwegiæ, was murdered in the region—drowned, and disposed of in the marshland at the behest of her brother, Harald Bluetooth. Familiar with the stories of old, Danish King Frederick VI (r. 1808–1839) commanded that a grand wooden sarcophagus be made for the body, one he thought was befitting of the noble status of a long-dead medieval Norwegian queen with Danish ancestry. In 1977, however, radiocarbon dating confirmed a long-held suspicion that the body was in fact much older than the Viking Age. Instead, it dated to ca. 490 BCE and therefore was not the body of Gunnhild. 

By analyzing “Gunnhild’s” royal sarcophagus and the funerary rituals bestowed on her through the lens of materiality and sensorial engagement, we can explore the ways in which King Frederick VI and other Danes of the nineteenth century sought to memorialize who they believed to be a royal medieval woman. The story would not be complete, however, without also including an analysis of the bog body itself, the so-called Haraldskær Woman—who now resides in a climate-controlled case in the Museum of Vejle—regardless of her ancient provenance. Were there other factors that made these nineteenth-century researchers believe they were dealing with a medieval woman, or was it just the echoes of perpetuated social and cultural memory? Despite the scientific advances that assisted in the differentiation of these two women of the distant past, there has remained a persistent connection between them in modern discourse. The name Gunnhild, for example, remains on modern museum and church didactics even when clearly referencing the Haraldskær Woman. Therefore, a look at the twenty-first-century understanding of the Viking Age Gunnhild and the lingering link that is inextricably shared with the Haraldskær Woman and how that link is or is not expressed through cultural heritage sites is also an essential component to consider.

In 1632, during the English Civil War, Parliamentarian soldiers stormed their way into Winchester Cathedral, causing mayhem and severely damaging the building and its precious monuments and relics. In the presbytery, royal mortuary chests were dragged down from the screen and spilled out, bones scattering everywhere, some picked up by the raiders and used as projectiles. In the aftermath, clergy members and locals alike helped clean up, placing the mixed-up bones and their fragments back into the chests with as much reverence as possible. Thirty years later, the badly damaged chests were remade, the names of bishops, kings, and a single queen, Emma of Normandy (d. 1052), painted on the sides. Almost six hundred years earlier in 1042, ten years before her death, Emma of Normandy was presented with the completed copy of the Encomium Emmae Reginae, a book that she commissioned and for which she had a hand in the crafting of its propagandic and dynastic narrative. As a twice-crowned queen of England who was embroiled in political upheaval following the death of her second husband, King Cnut (994-1035)—Thyra and Gorm’s great-grandson—and at least three of her children, Emma was determined to ensure that she, and her family’s memory of the Danish dynastic legacy in England, lived on.

A material analysis of the memorialization of Emma of Normandy through these two very different types of material culture, the mortuary chests and the Encomium, can offer a unique perspective. The mortuary chests of Winchester Cathedral offer a view of Emma through the eyes of several centuries’ worth of onlookers, positive and negative alike. The Encomium, however, offers an example of self-memorialization and shows how Emma herself had the ability, power, and control over how the Jelling dynastic regime was perceived in its final years.

Attempting to make sense of a historical puzzle will always present challenges. Understanding Thyra, the Jelling dynasty, and the Viking Age is particularly difficult when sources are inconsistent and contradictory. While written works are wonderful resources to have, it is essential to remember that they cannot be relied upon solely to recount a history that took place in the past, a past even for the authors of those works. This does not mean that they are purely fictional stories or should be discredited, but instead they must be further supplemented by tangible material objects which can additionally speak to cultural customs, shifts upon a physical or political landscape, and complicated identities and relational dynamics. Jelling 1, and the three additional stones that mention Thyra, are therefore perhaps the only direct material link, the only true primary sources that we can utilize to understand the ways in which Thyra’s life and death impacted the people who admired her, loved her, and survived her. And still, as with so much of the work that we do, the stones, the monument complex, and Thyra’s place within the dynasty present even more questions than we yet have answers to.
 
We have seen that since at least the late twelfth century, authors, historians, and archaeologists alike have found Thyra, whatever her lineage, upbringing, and life may have been, to be a powerful woman in Viking Age Denmark. Through the combined textual and material culture evidence, it is hard to ignore that she doubtlessly commanded a respected level of power and influence over the Jelling dynasty, Denmark, and perhaps other parts of Scandinavia and the North Sea region. When we attempt to trace the life, death, and historical relevance of women who lived over a thousand years ago, it is important to remember that an object does not make or define a person, but instead acts as a catalyst for further exploration. By memorializing her with the construction of four different rune stones, her contemporaries were able to secure through stone Thyra’s physical and immutable legacy as a prominent, powerful, and complex medieval woman.
