---
layout: post
title: 'Chapter Three: <br> <i>“Commemorate the Things That Ought to Be Remembered”: Materiality and Memory of the Jelling Dynasty</i>'
description: 
image: images/jelling-pano.jpg
nav-menu: false
show_tile: false
---


How we comprehend and interpret Thyra and the Jelling dynasty is intrinsically tethered to concepts of memory. The construction of cultural and social memory within the Viking Age and early medieval Scandinavia has greatly influenced present understandings, and therefore modern histories. The same can also be said, however, for the impact that modern memory has had on our own considerations of the medieval past. This chapter will explore medieval memory and materiality by further expanding on the textual and material culture source themes introduced in Chapters One and Two. This chapter will also investigate the connection between medieval and modern by examining how heritage sites and museums act as repositories of past memories and facilitators of new memories through sensorial and embodied interactions with material culture and landscape. By analyzing Jelling as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in tandem with the associated _Kongernes_ _Jelling_ museum, how Thyra’s legacy has been and continues to be perpetuated becomes clearer.

### Memory and Materiality

Human memory is delicate, limited, and intangible, yet it is also essential to how we interact with and understand the world around us both now and in the past. Memory is both deeply personal and inherently social, although these two are not mutually exclusive. Interdisciplinary interactions between historical, archaeological, and philosophical perspectives of memory have been and remain necessary in understanding how people and societies—medieval and modern—remembered and forgot their own past and their own histories. The study of memory is immense and complex, and therefore the discussion of memory throughout this chapter follows what Howard Williams has dubbed “archaeologies of remembrance.”<sup>[\[1\]](#footnote-1)</sup> Rather than prioritizing the neurological processes involved in memory formation, storage, and recall, the examination of memory production via material culture and social contexts is a more apt analytical tool for the purpose of this chapter.<sup>[\[2\]](#footnote-2)</sup>

Physical memorials and monuments and the rituals of maintenance connected to them become the modes of memory which are necessary within the “archaeologies of remembrance” framework. Similarly, as Andrew Jones puts it, both memorialization and commemoration fall under the so-called inventive and performative “technologies of remembrance,” which are facilitated by material culture.<sup>[\[3\]](#footnote-3)</sup> These frameworks can be distilled more simply under the shorter title of “memory work,” a phrase which will be used throughout the rest of this chapter. Memorialization is an intentional act for the remembrance of a specific person, group, or event “in an appropriate way and through an appropriate medium.”<sup>[\[4\]](#footnote-4)</sup> Acts of memorialization typically connote a desire for temporal endurance; a method of long-term cultural remembering.<sup>[\[5\]](#footnote-5)</sup> Commemoration is a related form of memory work in which remembering and honoring become a recurrent activity that can be done on an individual or collective basis and at both the mental and physical levels.<sup>[\[6\]](#footnote-6)</sup> While commemorative practices and performance can and do exist over the long term, their fluidness is often representative of shorter-term social memory.<sup>[\[7\]](#footnote-7)</sup> Physical objects are paramount to remembrance, and humans interact with them in myriad ways whereby they create, access, and interpret memory. Objects do not exist “as absolute and inviolate records of historical events,” but instead provide a catalyst or cue, acting as a mnemonic agent for the ways in which humans engage with the performance of remembering.<sup>[\[8\]](#footnote-8)</sup>

Additionally, materiality is an extremely useful analytical tool when working in a multidisciplinary academic landscape that deals with memory production and interpretation. Incorporating materiality into memory work further enriches various versions of the past by adding sensorial, embodied, and even emotional layers. Williams, Kirton, and Gondek explain that materiality is not a “Monolithic theory of material culture. It is, instead, an approach that prioritizes the physicality (material) of objects or sites and examines the relationship between people, objects/monuments and actions, allowing the exploration of social networks and meanings.”<sup>[\[9\]](#footnote-9)</sup> Sandra Dudley expands this definition, describing materiality in this way:

In part at least it connotes the form and the materials of which an object consists, together with the techniques by which it may have been made or formed, any additions or presentational conventions (such as a frame) … and all and any traces of the passage of time and, especially, physical human interaction. Materiality implies too, though, engagement – be it cognitive, emotional, or imaginative alone or physically, bodily participative as well.<sup>[\[10\]](#footnote-10)</sup>

Using materiality, memory is accessed not just through an analysis of what an object is and how it was constructed, but it can also usefully incorporate place, landscape, nature, and environment. It considers what the historical actors and the historical interpreters alike felt throughout their respective processes. This holistic approach therefore not only informs us of our own interactions with the physical objects of memory work, but also assists us in comprehending how medieval people and societies may also have connected to the concepts of memory and legacy via material culture.

### Medieval Memory Work

Memory will always influence how we envision, comprehend, and interact with the world around us. In Chapters One and Two, we have already explored, albeit not explicitly, some of the themes of medieval memory work that encapsulate the history of Thyra and the Jelling dynasty. Returning to these themes, but more directly through the lens of memory and/or materiality, we can further explore how Thyra’s immediate contemporaries and medieval historians of just a few centuries after her death interacted with these concepts.

#### _Material Memory of the Jelling Dynasty—Landscape, Place, and Engagement_

The Jelling monument complex, from the perspective of the Viking Age, offers an excellent case study on the impact that materiality and sensorial engagement can have upon individual and social memory. The context of the individual components of the monument complex and, in particular, its runestones, was detailed at some length in Chapter Two. We saw that the primary function of runestones was memorializing and commemorative memory work, using inscriptions and ornamentation carved in stone to construct and eternally perpetuate the memory of a deceased loved one. In turn, Thyra’s four runestones, Jelling 1, Jelling 2, Bække 1, and Læborg, exposed how the memories of specific people, namely Gorm, Harald, and Ravnunge-Tue, helped shape the social memory of Thyra and the Jelling dynasty. Additionally, we saw that the construction of the monument complex utilized significant physical components—runestones, burial mounds, and ship setting, among others—to do the same kind of memory work for the establishment and the maintenance of the early Jelling dynasty from the standpoint of political power.

Physical monuments and their mnemonic properties are naturally entangled with the landscape that they inhabit. Together, monuments and memories become rooted in the landscape, and notions of place and placemaking therefore also become an essential physical component of memory work.<sup>[\[11\]](#footnote-11)</sup> We will likely never know exactly why or how Gorm and Harald chose the Jelling landscape for the site of their memorial complex, but inferences have been made based on various geological, topological, and even mythological analyses. Jelling is located inland on the southern end of a high-elevation rolling plain, between roughly 328 feet and 377 feet (100-115m) above sea level, the highest in the region; the glacial moraine valley immediately to the south provides a natural border between central and southern Jutland.<sup>[\[12\]](#footnote-12)</sup> Various communication networks also interspersed the area, including the north-south _Hærvejen_ (Army Road) situated a short distance away. More localized spur roads also crisscrossed the region; one, along the western border of the monument complex, likely even dictated the complex’s overall north-north-east to south-south-west orientation. Additionally, the sources of Jutland’s four primary river systems are nearby on all sides, providing access to the North Sea to the west and the Vejle Fjord, Kattegat, and the Baltic Sea to the east.<sup>[\[13\]](#footnote-13)</sup> The selection of Jelling for the monument complex, based upon strategic topographical vantage points, roads, and waterways made for an easily protected, and also easily accessible site. But, the possibility of an intentional mythological connection should not be discounted, particularly when viewing the complex as a justification of royal power. In the Eddic poem _Grímnísmal_, it is said that _Hvergelmir_, one of the three well-springs of the world tree Yggdrasil, “is the origin of all the rivers.”<sup>[\[14\]](#footnote-14)</sup> By establishing an enduring memorial site to royal dynastic legacy near the headwaters of Jutland’s rivers, Jelling’s existence as an earthbound place could certainly be connected to mythological memory.

The landscape surrounding Jelling offered ample connectivity and access for social memory, but so too did the monuments themselves upon the landscape. During its earliest phase, and despite its association to Danish royalty, the first memorial held a prominent and public place. Situating runestones and other physical memorials near a public road was a guaranteed way to ensure that the memory and legacy of the deceased person(s) could live on. At Jelling, this was imperative to the establishment of the dynasty upon the landscape and within the social sphere of Jutland. The gargantuan tapered oval ship setting could probably have been seen from a great distance away, depending on the elevation of the viewer in relation to the site. If a person was traveling to or around Jelling via the western road, the stones would appear greater in both number and size the closer they got. This type of shifting perspective in size and shape was no doubt influential for those who viewed it. The influence that the composite of these attributes on the landscape had upon the people of the region was likely an intentional decision of the monument planner, and thus significantly shaped how Thyra and the dynasty were to be remembered.

Establishing the early memorial as publicly accessible allowed for those who wished to pay their respects to do so in an active, embodied, and tangible manner. Gorm and Harald’s memories of Thyra and hopes for her and their own legacy then permeated into each individual through interactions with the memorial. By walking around the ship setting, interweaving between the standing stones, running fingers along the dimples and cracks in the fieldstone, encircling them, sizing them up, reading the runes of Jelling 1, etc., the creation of social memory was further perpetuated through individual experiences.

As the monument complex was enhanced throughout the second half of the tenth century, and as its association as a royal site was cemented, the public’s access became reduced and was perhaps eventually removed entirely.<sup>[\[15\]](#footnote-15)</sup> The construction of the palisade significantly changed the meaning of the site, sending the message that the monument complex represented exclusivity. The public’s interaction with the site was relegated to the visual, and a highly mediated one at that. The ship setting, the foundational component of the site, was no longer visible. It was no longer possible to get close, to feel, to read. The sounds of continuous construction and eventually the sight of the high burial mounds peeking above the sightline of the wall were an indication that the interior had changed.

When the ship setting was partially dismantled and built over, meaning and memory were likely at odds. Jelling 1 became obsolete and was removed from its (likely) prominent context. Those who interacted publicly with the ship setting and Jelling 1 could no longer utilize those objects as a mnemonic aid in the same way as they had before, and new memories and interpretations of Thyra, the dynasty, and the site had to be made. Younger generations, who did not know anything but the palisade and the royal exclusivity it represented, instead shaped their own memories of the Jelling dynasty around its extensive architecture. By the time the palisade came down, forty years of memories had been created, shaped, and forgotten. While the Jelling dynasty was affixed to the landscape despite decades of change, Thyra’s immediate influence was no longer on full display at the site in which her memorial was so foundational. Despite this, however, the perpetual commemorative and memorializing nature of the Jelling Stones, along with Bække 1 and Læborg only about twenty miles (30km) away, meant that Thyra would not be forever forgotten.

### _Oral and Written Memory_

Old Norse society was built on oral traditions. Prior to the adoption of Christianity and the introduction of monastic scribal traditions, Norse origin stories, belief systems, genealogies, travel knowledge, poetry, and mythology were all based upon remembering, forgetting, interpreting, and transmitting mouth to ear to mouth to ear for generations. This is not to say that there was not a Norse written culture at all; they certainly did have one in the shape of runic inscriptions (as we have seen). But while it is likely that many people could read and create runes, they were not the only, or even the primary, method of knowledge dissemination.

Memory and legacy were concepts with which Norse people were highly preoccupied; these concepts were built into their foundational pre-Christian belief systems and persisted well after the conversion. The primary deity of the Nordic pantheon, Odin, is supported by his two raven companions who are named _Huginn_, “Thought,” and _Muninn_, “Memory.” The originally orally transmitted and later textually documented Eddic poem _Hávamál_, intended as a kind of roadmap to living a good life, provides another example:

> Cows die,
> Family die,
> You will die the same way.
> I know one thing
> That never dies:
> The reputation of the one who’s died.<sup>[\[16\]](#footnote-16)</sup>

Elites were particularly interested in how they would be remembered and would hire professional skalds to compose poems about their deeds. These poems would be officially recited or sung aloud at group events, the story to then be remembered in myriad ways by those in attendance and perhaps transmitted to new groups over time. The tenth-century Norwegian skald, Eyvindr Finnsson _skáldaspillir_ (skald-player), likened his crafted oral transmissions to a stone bridge that connects the past, present, and future, bringing a material aspect to an intangible memorialized practice.<sup>[\[17\]](#footnote-17)</sup>

By the twelfth century, the written works of Sven Aggesen, Saxo Grammaticus, and the many anonymous saga authors were significantly shaped by both the early and contemporary medieval social memory. Although these authors were working with the well-established tools of history writing, pen and parchment, the past they depicted was no doubt influenced by the orally transmitted memories of their and previous generations (memory which was often triggered by material culture). Aggesen and Saxo were members of the first several generations of Latinized and literate Scandinavians following the Viking Age, during a period that we now consider significantly transformational to the interpolation of memory into the production of historical knowledge. They were in a unique position in which they had access to Danish social memory which had been historicized and cemented in early manuscripts, such as Adam of Bremen’s ca. 1075 historical work, but also had access to people who were still firmly established in the traditions of oral culture. Sven Aggesen gets the closest to outright acknowledging orally transmitted social memory as a historical source when he comments, “and lest I should seem to be narrating fable as history, I shall give an abbreviated account of what I have been able to ascertain by questioning aged men and ancient authorities.”<sup>[\[18\]](#footnote-18)</sup> Not only is Aggesen interacting with a cemented, but perhaps fading Norse oral historical tradition, he is exclaiming that it should be regarded as a valid lens upon the past throughout his own work and that of others moving forward.

Aggesen and Saxo similarly acknowledged the role that their own works would, or at least should, have in the construction of social and cultural memory in the future, and in turn they evoke the type of memory work practices discussed above, memorialization and commemoration:

> As this world grows old and evils gather apace, a man can strive to commemorate the things that ought to be remembered with all the care and industry he can muster.<sup>[\[19\]](#footnote-19)</sup>

> The reputation of our people should not lie forgotten under ancient mould, but be blest with a literary memorial.<sup>[\[20\]](#footnote-20)</sup>

Like their Viking Age Norse forebears, this indicates a desire to understand the past both for themselves, and for the continued long-term recognition of the people, places, and events that they have interpreted using their own memories and the memories of others. Whereas Eyvindr Finnsson had his metaphorical stone bridge, Aggesen’s and Saxo’s carefully selected words, crafted paragraphs, books, and manuscripts then act as tangible physical products, assisting in the creation of new memories for anyone who interacts with them.

The transmission of history and culture through both oral and written methods during the medieval period can be equally analyzed by materiality and sensorial engagement. Through the embodied nature of orality and storytelling, the speaker becomes a vessel, their produced words and body language a catalyst for memory. The dramatic quality of how the individual sounds emerge from their body through their mouth, perhaps enhanced by props or further exaggerated or subtle body movements, and make their way into the eyes, ears, and bodies of the listeners assists in the process. What and how the audience engages with then later supports their own memory work; what they remember and forget further continues to support the construction of social memory. Both actors, the active storyteller and the passive listener, therefore, play an equally important role. The same kind of relationship and modes of engagement can be claimed for memory work that is produced through written culture. The author, drawing perhaps upon intangible memory work of the past, translates it into something tangible, which then becomes the product of memory work and a new mnemonic device. The physical act of thinking, remembering, feeling the wet ink slide across the stiff parchment, further embodies the memory being transcribed. When a reader interacts with a manuscript, their eyes scan in all directions across the page, the weight and smell of the parchment connect, and together they act as a trigger for further engagement with the memory of the past as well as the creation of new memories.

### Modern Memory Work at Jelling

The practice of modern memory work of the medieval is done on a grand scale, across a range of disciplines, and through various mediums all around the globe. Cultural heritage sites and museums are some of the most popular ways for the public to interact with the medieval, and Jelling is no exception. With the movement of time, the very same Viking Age objects, rooted in the same location, are now subject to a different but related cultural landscape and can act as a catalyst to new memories, new interpretations, and new histories. This view is similar to Pierre Nora’s _lieux de mémoire_ (“sites of memory”) which act as representations of the past “because there are no longer _milieux de mémoire_, real environments of memory…. If we were able to live within memory, we would not have needed to consecrate _lieux de_ _mémoire._”<sup>[\[21\]](#footnote-21)</sup> A site of memory may no longer be exactly representative of past memory, but such sites store echoes of that past which can still be accessed through archaeological research and material culture, as well as curatorial and interpretive decisions demonstrated to the public. Breaks and fractures are just as useful to the production of cultural memory as continuity is, and the establishment or even re-establishment of modern sites of cultural heritage upon Viking Age sites provides a dynamic memorial landscape.<sup>[\[22\]](#footnote-22)</sup>

In 1994, Jelling Mounds, Runic Stones and Church became the first site in Denmark to be placed on the UNESCO World Heritage List.<sup>[\[23\]](#footnote-23)</sup> The importance of the monuments and site to the history of Denmark had been recognized for centuries, but the UNESCO decision allowed for greater conservation, management, funding, public programming, international recognition, and tourism. In 2000, the _Kongernes Jelling_ (Kings’/Royal Jelling) museum, a division of the National Museum of Denmark, was opened just to the west of the monuments, providing interior exhibition space, a café, and a gift shop to visitors.<sup>[\[24\]](#footnote-24)</sup> By 2009, the weathering of Jelling 1 and Jelling 2 had become drastic enough that UNESCO enacted a State of Conservation mission to determine how to best protect the stones, and in 2011 glass and cast bronze cases were fitted neatly around them. Significant results from the excavations conducted from the mid-2000s through to the early 2010s, particularly the discovery of the palisade and the ship setting, changed the modern understanding of the site’s layout and landscape. A protective buffer zone surrounding the monument was implemented during this period, leading to town roads being diverted or even converted into walkways to cut down on further environmental concerns and to promote walkability. Similarly, several nearby structures were demolished in order to “strengthen the relationship between the property and its setting ... to contribute to the integrated value of the whole monument and its environment.”<sup>[\[25\]](#footnote-25)</sup> In 2013, in accordance with the regulations of the buffer zone, _Kongernes_ _Jelling_ underwent an expansion; the store and café became larger, and more exhibition space was added onto the building, along with a rooftop observation deck overlooking the monument site. In 2018, the boundary of the complex was expanded from 4.96 hectares (12.2 acres) to 12.7 hectares (31.38 acres), in order to include the new findings.<sup>[\[26\]](#footnote-26)</sup> As an open-air site it is difficult to determine exactly how many individuals have visited the monument area, but _Kongernes Jelling_ has seen a steady increase in the last thirteen years, which likely reflects the monument area as well. In 2010, 28,399 visitors explored the museum during the 1,698 hours that it was open.<sup>[\[27\]](#footnote-27)</sup> By 2023, those numbers were up exponentially, to 218,145 visitors and 2,200 open hours, making _Kongernes_ _Jelling_ the fourth most visited museum within the National Museum family.<sup>[\[28\]](#footnote-28)</sup>

Through the lenses of materiality and engagement (which can include material analysis and interpretation, embodiment, senses, emotion, and more), we can see how both the internal exhibition spaces of _Kongernes_ _Jelling_ and the outdoor landscape of the monument site work together as repositories of past memory and facilitators of the new.

#### _Interior – Kongernes Jelling_

Entering into the primary exhibition spaces at _Kongernes Jelling_ is a bit like stepping back in time. Materiality and embodiment are at the forefront, and the dedicated interpretive space name “The Experience Center” indicates that this is a highly intentional choice in curation and exhibition design.<sup>[\[29\]](#footnote-29)</sup> The first room is meant for orientation, for storytelling; it is a liminal space between the loud and busy entrance hall and administrative ticket desk and the flowing, open interpretive spaces of the museum proper. The room is loosely modeled to look and feel like the inside of a Viking Age longhouse, and the body is immediately inundated with new sensations the moment a visitor steps inside. The lighting is low, golden and glowing, so that it takes a few moments for eyes to adjust. The heat of the room is palpable and mixed with a woody and comforting scent. The encircling walls are covered with wooden panels and the ceiling is lower here than in any of the other spaces in the building, but it does not feel oppressive. In the center of the room is a “hearth fire,” a modern-looking sleek black bench that is topped with a long, low screen that projects video of crackling, flaming logs. Additional black benches encircle three perimeter walls, the fourth taken up by a slightly elevated platform, a red lacquered high seat placed squarely in the center.<sup>[\[30\]](#footnote-30)</sup> The king, in Jelling’s case Gorm or Harald, would have sat in this position of power.

Here, the recognition of oral traditions of the Viking Age as commemorative and memorializing practice are on full display, alongside some interpretive assistance from twenty-first-century technology. Wall text invites visitors to sit and listen, and explains that “Here by the fireside, people of both high and low birth met and heard splendid stories. In this way, the stories survived for many generations and were retold for hundreds of years.” The fire crackles dramatically, and a disembodied female voice enters the room from hidden speakers and begins to tell stories from Norse mythology. The flames jump, sway, and shift, subtly morphing into animations of the people, creatures, and places that are being described by the narrator. When a story is complete and the voice recedes, the fire calms and once again crackles in its original form. The longhouse room orients the visitor, prepares them for the remaining exhibition spaces by situating them in a place and time where history and mythology were often intertwined and highly dependent upon oral transmission. Recreating an experience that would have been commonplace to people of the Viking Age, modern visitors at _Kongernes_ _Jelling_ can begin to understand how information and memory were transmitted through generations by embodied, sensorial encounters.

Moving out of the longhouse room, the exhibition further contextualizes the Viking Age experience through storytelling, following an overall theme of the Norse life-cycle amid the backdrop of the early Jelling dynasty and its foundations with Gorm and Thyra. Extensive interactive displays represent all modalities of Viking Age life, highlighting the importance of farming, agriculture, and specialized craft production alongside the often politically turbulent and violent encounters that came with regional power struggles, with which Gorm, Thyra, and later Harald were intimately involved.

Artistic representations of Gorm and Thyra frame the entryway into the next space, accompanying text loosely and briefly contextualizing their lives for the visitor. For Thyra, questions about her identity are raised: Where did she come from? The wall text highlights that she became a queen due to her marriage to Gorm and discredits the myth that she built the Danevirke, and as we have seen in Chapter One, this interpretation is certainly substantiated. The wall text describing Gorm solidifies his role as Jelling’s king in connection with the runestone Jelling 1, which is depicted by his side. The text says, “There were kings before him, but Gorm had his royal title mentioned upon a runestone. He is therefore remembered today.” Although Thyra is depicted with an artistic representation of the North Mound and stones of the ship setting, there is no mention here that they were likely built in her honor, or that she is the deceased person being commemorated on Jelling 1. Reading between the lines of these depictions of Gorm and Thyra indicates an inaccurate and misleading interpretive subtext that insinuates that Thyra both lacked agency or power of her own and is likewise not as worthy of remembrance in the same way as her husband is.

Moving through the doorway into the next space, the visitor is invited to consider death in the Viking Age, using the Jelling burial mounds as a guide. The dark room contains some of the few artifacts discovered during the nineteenth- and twentieth-century excavations into the mounds, carefully on display in boxes set into the walls and behind glass. The context of each artifact is enhanced by video projections in the museum’s signature artistic style. When viewed, the objects first appear well lit, but solitary; after a few undisturbed moments, the projection begins, showing the visitor what the object would have looked like and been used for in the Viking Age. Wall text shows how the burial mounds were made and what sort of ritualistic processes would have accompanied a funeral. At the end of the long room, wall text poses the question, “Who was the burial chamber made for?” The exhibition lets visitors decide for themselves, scrolling through depictions of Thyra and Gorm on opposite ends of a cylindrical rolling wall, flanked by a Jelling-style interlace motif.

The ground floor exhibition space completes the earthly life cycle through a fascinating interactive display exploring physical death through battle and the journey into the afterlife and Valhalla. On the floor there are many rounded and oblong decals which represent stones in the tapered shape of a ship setting, and at the widest point of the setting sits an angled triptych of large floor-to-ceiling mirrors. The side mirrors display faint human figures as if beckoning the visitor to join them. A projection on the center mirror invites the visitor to step forward into the stone setting; four markers on the floor indicate points at which to advance and stop. The center mirror is clear, the visitor only able to see a true mirror image of themselves, but upon stepping into the setting to the first point, this changes. Violence breaks out upon the visitor’s body, splatters of blood can be seen all over and sounds of battle can be heard, yelling, swords clashing and shields thumping; the visitor has died an honorable death in battle. Taking a step forward, the visitor experiences the funeral pyre, their body engulfed in flames and the roaring sound of crackling fire in their ears. The third step sends the shining and shimmering body across Bifrost, the rainbow bridge of Norse myth which connects the earthly plane (Midgard) to the land of the Gods (Asgard). With the final step, the visitor has reached Valhalla, the central mirror’s reflection showing only the lifelike image of the visitor once again. The side mirrors, however, showcase an infinity of projected Viking warriors, with shields and swords in their hands, and drinking horns raised to welcome the visitor into the afterlife. Death in battle was not something that all people of the Viking Age experienced, but the preoccupation with glory, or at the very least respect, in death and the hope for an eternal afterlife certainly were, whether it was through the memory of those still living or through a person’s celestial resting place.

From here, a spiral staircase painted with the colors of the rainbow, replicating Bifrost, takes visitors to the second floor. The narrative shifts from daily life and death to explore the transition from the Norse pagan religion to Christianity, and of the Jelling dynasty’s growth and expansion with Harald Bluetooth at the helm. The second-floor narrative arc still upholds the importance of oral transmission but also introduces the influence that written culture and later analysis of material culture via archaeology have had upon the site. Early printed copies of Saxo Grammaticus’s _Gesta Danorum_ and Ole Worm’s _Danish Monuments_ are on display, open to the pages that contain woodblock illustrations of the site and the stones. The second-floor space is massively informative but lacks the same kind of interactive and immersive experience as the ground floor. What it does accomplish, however, is that it begins to prime the visitor for experiencing the exterior site. At the end of the exhibition space, flanked by text panels about the recent advancements in the research of the site, a panoramic window offers visitors their first look at the monuments. A final spiral staircase leads to the rooftop observation deck, where visitors can get an expansive view of the monument site from the west, overlooking the two burial mounds and the church.

#### _Exterior – The Monument Complex_

The guided narrative that is prevalent throughout the exhibition spaces inside _Kongernes Jelling_ is more minimal at the monument complex outside. There are a few orienting text plaques set at entry points near parking lots and one near the runestones and church, but otherwise, visitors are meant to experience the physicality and scale of the site unhindered by an excess of textual influence. Pathways encircle the perimeter of the complex, loosely following the outline of the palisade, and also snake through the center of the site, connecting the monuments to each other and to the surrounding town of Jelling. The sheer size and accessibility of the modern-day site allows visitors to choose their own adventure; to select what, when, how long, and even if they interact with components of the monument complex.

The central monument area contains the still standing material remnants of the past, the North and South Mounds, the twelfth-century Romanesque stone church, and the runestones, Jelling 1 and 2. Visitors coming from the parking lot or _Kongernes Jelling_ to the west or the parking lot to the east will get a view of the South Mound first, followed by the church and glass-covered runestones, and of the outline of the North Mound peeking out behind the church to the north. Walking closer, everything becomes slowly larger, and the scale of the site begins to take shape, until the internal path leads the visitor to the north side of the South Mound, between it and the gate to the modern churchyard and cemetery. Standing here, facing the South Mound, the visitor must crane their neck upwards and sweep their gaze side to side in order to take it all in. The path and the town buildings on the other side are no longer noticeable behind the mound’s massive façade.

Entering the churchyard, the visitor is immediately greeted by the two covered runestones, tucked between the church’s front door to the north and burial plots of Jelling’s local families to the south. The glass cases around the stones present something of a memory and materiality catch-22. From a conservation perspective they are essential to the maintenance of the stones, and therefore to their potential for continued material endurance and the endurance of their commemorative properties. The cases are climate-controlled and spotlit, like out-of-context museum objects usually are, adding a curatorial interpretation to the stones, highlighting the “important” bits. But by closing them inside the cases, visitors’ interaction with them becomes mediated; they are no longer publicly accessible in the same ways in which runestones were often meant to be interacted with during the Viking Age. Moving around the stones, the visitor is not able to access a true 360-degree view, as only three sides are made of clear glass. The fourth side, and top, are made of cast bronze which includes a small door, allowing easy entry for researchers and caretakers without having to remove the cases completely. This is sometimes a difficult, but necessary, component of heritage management. Thus, the way that visitors are able to interact with the monuments significantly impacts how those objects are utilized as memory triggers for individuals and the collective. While the glass might not effectively hinder visitors from producing or accessing memory, it does impact aspects of the historically intended and unintended materiality of the runestones.

Like the physical monuments, the present-day church is very much rooted in the community of Jelling, both in its physical presence, but more so in the context of what it represents to the establishment and continuity of Christianity in Denmark. Christian services have been continually held here for over one thousand years. Like the landscape which surrounds it, much of the church’s interior has undergone dramatic change in those thousand years. Extensive excavations (described in Chapter Two) under the modern church floor posed new questions about the identity of the possible royal man discovered there. Even now, researchers cannot be certain that the bones belong to Gorm, but the church, _Kongernes Jelling_, and UNESCO all tout it as more or less understood.<sup>[\[31\]](#footnote-31)</sup> Following the completion of the church excavation and analysis of the bones by the National Museum, the church was remodeled, the bones placed inside a zinc coffin and reinterred in the spot where they were discovered. Now, visitors can view this modern memorial by way of a marker of silver inlaid into the black and red granite wave-like design on the floor near the chancel arch.<sup>[\[32\]](#footnote-32)</sup>

Back outside and standing atop the mounds, visitors are able to get a different vantage point of the monument complex, experiencing for the first time its overall size and scale. Both mounds are accessible for climbing, but it is not necessarily an easy task; the narrow single track up the sloping sides have been trodden, allowing for single file only, and the grass to either side and all around is slippery, making it difficult to stray from the path. At the top, when the visitor is huffing and puffing, the mounds even out into a mostly flat, but lumpy platform for viewing. Both mounds offer sweeping views of the entire monument complex area, nearby neighborhoods and businesses in the town, and the rolling farmland of the landscape stretching out in the distance to the horizon. A breeze can be felt at this height, which is not the case at ground level, where it is blocked by the massive monuments.

The North Mound offers the most dramatic views of the complex, incorporating the outlines of the ship setting, outbuildings, and palisade. Following the completion of the excavation of the north section of the complex in 2013, various interpretive but conservation-safe components were added to the site. Atop the footprint of the original ship setting, now reburied, rectangular concrete slabs form the entirety of the outline, which remains currently exposed. Standing atop the North Mound, the visitor is in the direct center of the ship setting, at the direct center of the monument complex, the tapered concrete slabs culminating in the ship’s bow at the northernmost point, perfectly visible in the near distance. Surrounding the site, when not impeded by modern buildings, atop the footprint of the palisade is an artistic reconstruction of the palisade’s timber posts, again, made of concrete. Just inside the palisade are concrete slabs representing the timber, Trelleborg-style outbuildings, again atop the footprint of their Viking Age counterparts. The originals may no longer be available to visitors, but their echoes remain.

A walking path leads to and flows around these interpretive components. Without stopping, it would take a visitor roughly 30 minutes to walk the perimeter of the palisade. The parallel posts are at the estimated average height that the original timbers would have been, and visitors can stand directly by their side, sizing them up. The path snakes along either side of the palisade, allowing for investigative perspectives of both the interior and exterior of the site. At ground level, a somewhat distant vantage point for the concrete outbuilding footprints does not do justice to the type of unique interaction they provide. It is only when they are experienced close-up—or perhaps from a bird’s eye view—and moved across that visitors get a full picture of what the buildings would have looked like at the monument complex’s height. Carefully etched into the concrete is an exact replica of the architectural footprint of the buildings, based on the archeological research completed in 2013. Shadows of post holes, walls, and doorways are at the precise scale, and allow for visitors to walk through and around each building, into each individual room, gaining perspective on their size and immediate environment.

#### _Thyra’s Place Within Jelling as a Site of Memory_

Together, both the interior and exterior interpretive landscapes of _Kongernes_ _Jelling_ and the Jelling monument complex significantly influence how modern visitors interact with memory work via modes of materiality and sensorial activity. But how does Thyra fit into this picture? Are her historical memory and place within the Jelling dynasty well represented, and therefore are visitors able to grasp the potential of her influence? Are any of the memories made at Jelling ones that include Thyra?

Thyra is not excluded from the interpretive materials and narrative at _Kongernes_ _Jelling_, but what is included and how it is presented cast further shadows over the nuance and complexities of her still obscured life and uphold sexist and outdated historical traditions. The name _Kongernes_ _Jelling_, Kings’ Jelling or Jelling of the Kings, reflects this.<sup>[\[33\]](#footnote-33)</sup> The foundation of Jelling as an important historic site, and as a UNESCO World Heritage site, has been solely grounded in its connection to its kings: Gorm, who established the Danish monarchy and was the first to be called king on Jelling 1; and Gorm’s son, Harald Bluetooth, who expanded his father’s kingdom, ushered in Christianity, and was the conceptual and perhaps literal architect of some of the most important Danish Viking Age sites. This sentiment is reflected again through the language chosen in the descriptions used by ART+COM Studios and Molitor, the exhibition’s design contractor partners. ART+COM Studios’ website says, “The new Royal Jelling exhibition centre covers more than 1000 square metres. It houses an exhibition that explores Danish history and mythology and, crucially, the mysteries of the Viking kings Gorm the Old and Harald Bluetooth.”<sup>[\[34\]](#footnote-34)</sup> Similarly, Molitor’s description reads, “_Kongernes Jelling_ tells the family history of Gorm the Old, a Viking king, and his son Harald Bluetooth at the historic location that is seen as the birthplace of the country of Denmark.”<sup>[\[35\]](#footnote-35)</sup> Through these perspectives, Thyra is absent: only insinuated, merely a woman, perhaps a queen (and only because of her husband), who happens to be memorialized at Jelling.<sup>[\[36\]](#footnote-36)</sup> As we have seen above, questions of her identity and the location of her body following her death have been considered and proposed to visitors through interpretive material. The only other place where Thyra’s presence is made known is outside of the smaller, secondary exhibition space, where a mid-nineteenth-century sculpture of her stands tucked away in a blink-and-you’ll-miss-it corner.

It is important to state that the current interpretations of Thyra, Gorm, Harald, and the Jelling dynasty that is displayed in the exhibition spaces at _Kongernes_ _Jelling_ are about a decade old, having been installed in 2014-15 following the update of the building.<sup>[\[37\]](#footnote-37)</sup> None of the findings connecting Thyra to four runestones, discussed at length in Chapter Two, are on display, even temporarily, at least as of May 2024. That is not wholly unexpected, however. It is impossible to depict every single historical fact, debated discourse, and pending theory in an exhibition and it is just as difficult to ensure visitors are able to digest what information is available to them. Similarly, the collaborative effort of updating museum spaces takes a long time and is reliant on significant funding to execute properly.

Just because a fuller view of Thyra’s story is not currently on display does not mean that it will not ever be, and it does not mean that there are no inroads being made already. With the publication of Imer, Åhfeldt, and Zedig’s article, “A Lady of Leadership: 3D-Scanning of Runestones in Search of Queen Thyra and the Jelling Dynasty,” in _Antiquity_ in fall of 2023, the possibility that the narrative of the Jelling dynasty was changing yet again, made international headlines.<sup>[\[38\]](#footnote-38)</sup> Around the same time, the Danish Broadcasting Corporation released the three-part television series “_Gåden om Thyra_” (The Mysteries of Thyra), bringing the results of the study to a large Danish and Scandinavian audience.<sup>[\[39\]](#footnote-39)</sup> In spring of 2024, the gift shop at _Kongernes Jelling_ released a knitting pattern for a wool sweater that looks like the Jelling 1 stone, bringing yet another tangible (and wearable) way in which Thyra’s memory, and the public’s memory of Thyra, has been publicized. The interest is there, and it is only a matter of further time and research that will more fully incorporate the breadth of Thyra’s influence into the official narrative and memory of the Jelling dynasty.


---

#### Footnotes

1. Howard Williams, ed., _Archaeologies of Remembrance: Death and Memory in Past Societies_ (New York: Springer, 2003); Howard Williams, Joanne Kirton, and Meggen Gondek, eds., _Early Medieval Stone Monuments: Materiality, Biography, Landscape_ (Woodbridge, UK: Boydell, 2015). [↑](#footnote-ref-1)

2. Williams, _Archaeologies of Remembrance_; Williams, Kirton, and Gondek, _Early Medieval Stone Monuments._ [↑](#footnote-ref-2)

3. Andrew Jones, _Memories and Material Culture_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 44; Williams, Kirton, and Gondek, _Early Medieval Stone Monuments_, 11. [↑](#footnote-ref-3)

4. Jones, _Memories and Material Culture_, 42-4. [↑](#footnote-ref-4)

5. Lynn Haskell, “Memory’s Materiality: Ancestral Presence, Commemorative Practice, and Disjunctive Locales,” in _Archaeologies of Memory_, ed. Ruth M. Van Dyke and Susan E. Alcock (Oxford: Blackwell, 2003), 34-55, at 34. [↑](#footnote-ref-5)

6. Jones, _Memories and Material Culture_, 44. [↑](#footnote-ref-6)

7. Haskell, “Memory’s Materiality,” 34. [↑](#footnote-ref-7)

8. Ing-Marie Back Danielsson, “Walking Down Memory Lane: Rune-Stones as Mnemonic Agents in the Landscapes of Late Viking-Age Scandinavia,” in Williams, Kirton, and Gondek, _Early Medieval Stone Monuments_, 62-86; Jones, _Memories and Material Culture_, 22, 164; Lund, “Rune Stones as Material Relations,” 3. [↑](#footnote-ref-8)

9. Williams, Kirton, and Gondek, _Early Medieval Stone Monuments_, 13. [↑](#footnote-ref-9)

10. Sandra H. Dudley, ed., _Museum Materialities: Objects, Engagements, Interpretations_ (London: Routledge, 2010), 7. [↑](#footnote-ref-10)

11. Williams, Kirton, and Gondek, _Early Medieval Stone Monuments_, 20-4; Back Danielsson, “Walking Down Memory Lane,” 65-76; Lund, “Rune Stones as Material Relations,” 3. [↑](#footnote-ref-11)

12. Pedersen, “The Jelling Monuments,” 283. [↑](#footnote-ref-12)

13. Almut Schülke, “The Significance of Jelling in the Landscape of Communication,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 2: 95-125, at 101 and 102. [↑](#footnote-ref-13)

14. “_Grímnísmal_ (The Words of Odin in Disguise),” in _The Poetic Edda: Stories of the Norse Gods and Heroes_, ed. and trans. Jackson Crawford (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2015), 60-71, at 65, stanza 26; Julie Lund, “Banks, Borders, and Bodies of Water in a Viking Age Mentality,” _Journal of Wetland Archaeology_ 8 (2008): 53-72, at 57. [↑](#footnote-ref-14)

15. Schülke, “The Significance of Jelling in the Landscape of Communication,” 98. It is unsure if the site was used as a royal “ritual space,” and if so, what those rituals were and who they involved. [↑](#footnote-ref-15)

16. “_Hávamál_ (Council of Odin the One-Eyed),” in _The Poetic Edda: Stories of the Norse Gods and Heroes_, ed. and trans. Jackson Crawford (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2015), 17-47, at 30, stanza 77; David A. H. Evans, ed., _Hávamál_, Viking Society for Northern Research, Text Series 7, (London: University College London, 1986), 54, stanza 77 (“Deyr fé, / deyja frændr, / deyr sjálfr it sama; / ek veit einn / at aldri deyr: / dómr um dauðan hvern”). [↑](#footnote-ref-16)

17. Else Mundal, “Memory of the Past and Old Norse Identity,” in _The Making of Memory in the Middle Ages_, ed. Lucie Doležalová (Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2010), 463-72, at 464-5. [↑](#footnote-ref-17)

18. Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 48; Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_, 94 (“Et ne fabulose uidear historiam enarrare, quantum ab annosis et ueteribus certa ualui inquisitione percunctari, compendiose perstringam”). [↑](#footnote-ref-18)

19. Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 48; Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_, 94 (“Verum crebrescentibus malis huius in mundi senio, quantumlibet diligenti intentione commendabilia memorie quis conatur commendare, detractationis tamen neuticam declinabit dispendium”). [↑](#footnote-ref-19)

20. Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 2-3 (“Ne finitimis factorum traditione gaudentibus huius gentis opinio potius uetustatis obliuiis respersa quam literarum monumentis predita uideretur”). [↑](#footnote-ref-20)

21. Pierre Nora, “Between Memory and History: _Les Lieux de Mémoire_,” _Representations_ 26 (1989): 7-24, at 7 and 8. For Nora, “sites of memory” are often deeply rooted in nation building. This can certainly be argued in regard to Jelling and its significance to Danish national identity, but that will not be explored in any detail here. [↑](#footnote-ref-21)

22. Joshua Davies, _Visions and Ruins: Cultural Memory and the Untimely Middle Ages_ (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2018), 2. [↑](#footnote-ref-22)

23. “Jelling Mounds, Runic Stones and Church”; “The Criteria for Selection,” UNESCO World Heritage Convention, accessed April 19, 2025, <https://whc.unesco.org/en/criteria/>. Jelling was selected as a site under criterion (iii): “to bear a unique or at least exceptional testimony to a cultural tradition or to a civilization which is living or which has disappeared.” [↑](#footnote-ref-23)

24. Anne Pedersen, “The Jelling Monuments—A National Icon Between Legend and Fact,” in _Quo Vadis? Status and Future Perspectives of Long-Term Excavations in Europe_, ed. Claus von Carnap-Bornheim (Hamburg: Wachholz Murmann Publishers, 2014), 249-63, at 260; “Kongernes Jelling,” National Museum of Denmark, accessed April 19, 2025, <https://en.natmus.dk/museums-and-palaces/kongernes-jelling-home-of-the-viking-kings/>. [↑](#footnote-ref-24)

25. “Jelling Mounds, Runic Stones and Church.” [↑](#footnote-ref-25)

26. “Jelling Mounds, Runic Stones and Church—Documents, Minor Boundary Modification,” UNESCO World Heritage Convention, accessed April 19, 2025, <https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/697/documents/>. [↑](#footnote-ref-26)

27. “Museums—List of Detailed Visitor Numbers for all Museums (2010),” Danmark Statistiks, accessed April 18, 2025, <https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/kultur-og-fritid/museer-og-zoologiske-haver/museer>. [↑](#footnote-ref-27)

28. “Museums—List of Visitor Numbers for State and State-Recognized Museums (2023),” Danmark Statistiks, accessed April 18, 2025, <https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/kultur-og-fritid/museer-og-zoologiske-haver/museer>. [↑](#footnote-ref-28)

29. “The Experience Center at Kongernes Jelling—Home of the Viking Kings,” Kongernes Jelling, accessed April 18, 2025, <https://en.natmus.dk/museums-and-palaces/kongernes-jelling-home-of-the-viking-kings/experience-center/>. [↑](#footnote-ref-29)

30. A high seat is the Viking Age equivalent of a throne. It is a position of high status, and often representative of royalty. [↑](#footnote-ref-30)

31. “Unlocking Stories From Within,” Jelling Kirke, accessed April 21, 2025, <https://www.jellingkirke.dk/besoegvisit/about-jelling-church>. [↑](#footnote-ref-31)

32. “Unlocking Stories From Within.” [↑](#footnote-ref-32)

33. _Kongernes_ is also sometimes translated as “Royal,” which could be interpreted as somewhat more inclusive. _Kongernes_, however, is the genitive plural of _kongen_ (the king), meaning “of the kings.” [↑](#footnote-ref-33)

34. “Experience Centre Royal Jelling, 2015,” ART+COM Studios, accessed April 21, 2025, <http://artcom.de/en/?project=experience-centre-royal-jelling-2>. [↑](#footnote-ref-34)

35. “Kongernes Jelling. Home of the Viking Kings,” Molitor, accessed April 21, 2025, <https://molitor-berlin.de/en/project/kongernes-jelling-en/>. [↑](#footnote-ref-35)

36. Despite there being just as much, if not more, historical documentation of Thyra’s prowess than Gorm’s. [↑](#footnote-ref-36)

37. “Experience Centre Royal Jelling, 2015”; “Kongernes Jelling. Home of the Viking Kings.” [↑](#footnote-ref-37)

38. “Jelling Stone: 3D Scans Reveal Power of a Viking Queen—BBC News,” YouTube, accessed April 21, 2025, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XGhc5LEB_6I>; “Denmark’s First Viking Queen Was Likely More Powerful Than the King, Research Finds,” Bloomberg, accessed April 21, 2025, <https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-09-28/denmark-s-first-viking-queen-had-more-power-than-the-king>; “Carved Stones Speak of Viking Queen’s Power,” _Nature_ 622 (2023): 435. [↑](#footnote-ref-38)

39. “Gåden om Thyra,” DR, Accessed April 3, 2025, <https://www.dr.dk/drtv/serie/gaaden-om-thyra_408873>. [↑](#footnote-ref-39)
