---
layout: post
title: "Chapter Two: <br><i> Secured Through Stone: Thyra, Runestones, and the Monumental Jelling Dynasty</i>"
description: 
image: images/jelling-pano.jpg
nav-menu: false
show_tile: false
---


If there is so much variance surrounding Thyra’s early identity in written sources, what are we truly able to ascertain about her? There are many things about her life, death, and legacy that can be more thoroughly surmised when material culture is re-centered as a primary source through which to illuminate the hazy and contradictory texts. When working towards the recovery of historical components of the Viking Age, from a Norse culture that did not engage in so-called “traditional” historical writing, the evaluation of material culture evidence is not just a supplementary addition, but paramount to our understanding. Objects such as runestones, for example, become something of a hybrid source, a bridge between artifact and text that can be doubly analyzed as both to shed greater light on historical actors that have long been cast in shadow. Because of these objects, we can say for certain that Thyra was a real and powerful woman who lived and breathed in the tenth century, and that upon her death she was memorialized in a way that was befitting a woman of royal standing. In Thyra’s case, her runestones are deeply personal commemorative objects that offer us further insight into who she was as a person and how others viewed her in life, death, and across centuries. At the same time, we also establish more context related to cultural practices surrounding death, memorialization, and commemoration during the Viking Age. This chapter will explore these themes through an archaeological perspective and a closer look at the greater Jelling monument complex and Thyra’s runestones. It will also consider various research, challenges, and interpretations regarding the material culture of Thyra and the Jelling Dynasty that have been presented by scholars.

### The Jelling Monument Complex

It is impossible to understand Thyra’s material history without first situating ourselves within the Danish town of Jelling and its famous monument complex. The modern-day town is home to a few thousand people and a railway line brings tourists to explore shops, cafés, and the imposing burial mounds in the central part of town. Archaeological finds indicate that the greater Jelling region has been inhabited in varying capacities since the Neolithic (ca. 3800-3100 BCE).<sup>[\[1\]](#footnote-1)</sup> By the Viking Age, a few small farming settlements with formally planned structures dotted the rolling hills, the earliest dating to ca. 700. In the mid-900s Jelling’s high ground became the site of an expansive memorial complex, honoring the lives and deeds of Thyra, Gorm, and Harald, and further establishing the authority of Denmark’s first royal dynasty.

We will probably never know if Thyra and Gorm had anything to do with the conceptualization of the monument complex prior to their deaths in the mid-900s, if they even wanted to be memorialized in such a way, or if Jelling was their temporary or permanent home or just a strategic spot for the memorial.<sup>[\[2\]](#footnote-2)</sup> No royal residences have been discovered in the vicinity as of yet—although it is very possible that one could be sitting beneath the foundations of the modern town which lies mostly outside of the monument complex boundary, or was not in the immediate area at all.<sup>[\[3\]](#footnote-3)</sup> What we do know is that following the passing of Thyra, Gorm honored his wife with a runestone. Harald, following suit after Gorm’s death, continued with the tradition of memorialization but additionally saw an opportunity to enhance the scale, and thus the power and legitimacy, of his and his family’s elite political contributions. In addition to this, upon the death of his parents, in 963 Harald converted to Christianity, setting the stage for a fusion of pagan and Christian traditions at Jelling. More than anyone else, it was Harald who was the conceptual designer of what we know the Jelling Memorial Complex to be today, and Jelling, in turn, further set the groundwork for Harald’s monumental and military architectural prowess across Denmark.

In 1994, the two large burial mounds, two runestones, and the church at Jelling became a listed UNESCO World Heritage site.<sup>[\[4\]](#footnote-4)</sup> In 2018, the heritage boundary was expanded to a total of almost thirteen hectares and included a large stone ship setting and the remains of a timber palisade encircling the central monument area.

#### _The Burial Mounds_

Unlike other archaeological features which, until an excavation takes place, tend to remain hidden, the two burial mounds at Jelling stick out on the landscape quite conspicuously. The North Mound, the older of the two, which dates to ca. 960, is roughly twenty-five feet (7.5m) tall and 197 feet (60m) in diameter; the younger South Mound, finished ca. 990, however, is larger at thirty-one feet (9.5m) tall and 229 feet (70m) in diameter.<sup>[\[5\]](#footnote-5)</sup> Both have flattened tops. Their monumental stature piqued the early curiosity of scholars and the public alike and is the reason why Jelling remains one of, if not the most excavated and researched Viking Age site in Denmark. The first documented, yet unsuccessful excavation at Jelling occurred in 1704, at the behest of King Frederik IV (r. 1699–1730), whose militia provided the manpower for an exploration of the North Mound.<sup>[\[6\]](#footnote-6)</sup> Over a century later, in 1820, the North Mound was excavated yet again and this time a large oak burial chamber was discovered; no body was found and little was left inside, leading to the assumption that the mound had been looted “almost completely in antiquity.”<sup>[\[7\]](#footnote-7)</sup> This theory was further confirmed when a subsequent excavation into the mound, this time sponsored by King Frederik VII (r. 1848-1863), occurred in 1861 and dug out the mud and water that had accumulated in the chamber in the intervening years. The oak chamber itself was very large at twenty-two feet (6.7m) long and eight and a half feet (2.6m) wide with a ceiling height of almost five feet (1.45m).<sup>[\[8\]](#footnote-8)</sup> Whereas the internal chamber would have been richly furnished with a vast accumulation of grave goods with which to accompany the deceased on their journey into the afterlife, only a few objects remained: a carved and painted oak panel, three ornamented bronze hinge fittings, and a small engraved silver cup.

From the outset, the North Mound and its burial chamber were believed to be the final resting place of Thyra, and her name became synonymous with the earthen dome due to the nearby memorial runestone which mentioned her (Jelling 1 (DR 41), which will be discussed in more detail later). When the 1861 and later 1941-2 excavations of the South Mound turned up no evidence for a second burial chamber, the hypothesis shifted to allow for a dual-burial scenario; that Thyra and Gorm were interred together in the large North Mound chamber. At some point, the preeminence of Thyra’s North Mound occupancy was overshadowed by the question of the whereabouts of Gorm’s final resting place. Instead, it was proposed that the North Mound had been built for Gorm, and the South Mound acted as something of a cenotaph for Thyra, and perhaps even Harald.<sup>[\[9\]](#footnote-9)</sup> If there had been a burial (or burials) in the North Mound it was no longer present, so when was it removed and where did it go?

Over the years, excavators and researchers have proposed a few theories that have to do with a deep intrusion from the top of the mound down into the roof of the burial chamber. Dendrochronological dating indicates that the intrusion occurred ca. 965, only a few years after the mound was completed. Radiocarbon dating has positioned the intrusion a bit later, sometime around ca. 970-1015.<sup>[\[10\]](#footnote-10)</sup> Within this dating range, the intrusion occurred sometime within Harald’s lifetime or not long after, well within the range of the monument complex’s peak. The first theory surmises that Viking Age grave robbers dug into the burial chamber via the narrow intrusion and stole almost everything, objects and bodies included. This is within the realm of cultural possibilities, as _haugbrott_ (Norwegian for mound breaking) can be evidenced across the Norse sagas, as well as from other important and royally connected burials having been plundered during the Viking Age (such as the Oseberg and Gokstad ship burials in Norway).<sup>[\[11\]](#footnote-11)</sup> The next major theory is that upon Harald’s official conversion to Christianity ca. 963, he ordered that whoever was buried in the North Mound be exhumed, removed, and then reinterred in a Christian burial on the grounds of the Jelling Church. The basis for this theory is two-fold: one, from an ideological assumption that Harald would want to ensure that the souls of his parents, despite likely being pagan themselves, were “saved” now that a new religion had been established; and two, because excavations of the Jelling church nave in the 1970s turned up a burial chamber that contained the disarticulated bones of an adult man alongside grave goods that indicated potentially royal status.<sup>[\[12\]](#footnote-12)</sup>

#### _The Church_

The Jelling church is situated between the two mounds, only about thirty feet (10m) from the southern end of the North Mound, and has a central position within the monument complex. The earliest excavations of the church occurred in the 1940s and resulted in the discovery of at least three separate building phases under the foundation of the current stone church: a Christian stone church dating to ca. 1100 which eventually provided the footprint for the modern church; a burnt layer, followed by postholes that indicated a Nordic-style wooden stave church dating to the reign of Harald; and finally, a layer of large stones that was interpreted to be a pagan-affiliated temple or ritual site.<sup>[\[13\]](#footnote-13)</sup> The 1970s excavations expanded the understanding of the church’s history, confirming two additional consecutive wooden structures and hinting at a possible third before the building of the stone church in the early twelfth century. The numerous re-workings of the structures provide solid evidence that this part of the monument complex held pagan and Christian associations successively and overlapped during Harald’s reign within the Jelling dynasty. The trend of re-working a previous pagan ritual site into a site of Christian worship was something that occurred frequently during periods of conversion throughout medieval Europe, and the church at Jelling was one of the first in Denmark.

The burial chamber in the church was discovered to be sitting just below the subsoil, leading excavators to surmise that it was part of the earliest building phase. The wooden chamber was placed into a dug-out pit which was then infilled and topped with soil and turf, much like the North Mound. It is possible, although unconfirmed, that this lavish chamber burial was itself originally part of a burial mound in which the top layers were at some point removed and then built over with the various church structures. If the chamber had been opened and perhaps looted during this process, rather than just translated from the North Mound, it could account for the bones being disarticulated.<sup>[\[14\]](#footnote-14)</sup>

Like the North Mound burial chamber, the burial chamber under the church was also made from oak. Although smaller in size than the North Mound chamber, it was still large, measuring just over seven feet (2.2m) wide, roughly twelve feet (3.6m) long, and two and a half feet (0.8m) tall. The bones belonged to a male somewhere between thirty-five and fifty years old at the time of his death. The grave goods were of high quality and indicated elevated social status: five hundred golden coils that probably came from a textile and multiple silver-gilt and niello strap-fittings of the Jelling style.<sup>[\[15\]](#footnote-15)</sup> No absolute dating of the chamber burial has been determined, although relative dating processes by way of stratigraphic analysis and a comparison of the similar artistic styles of the grave goods to those found in the North Mound indicate that they are roughly contemporary with one another and date to the tenth century. Despite this, it cannot be determined exactly which burial occurred first. The presence of male bones alongside high-status grave goods provides the best evidence so far that the church burial is royal, and it is heavily speculated and generally accepted that the body is Gorm’s. To base this speculation on the emptiness of the North Mound burial chamber and the association of elite grave goods in the church burial chamber is shaky at best. Even the supposed age of the bones themselves—between thirty-five and fifty years—could perhaps contradict Gorm’s moniker “the Old,” unless of course his nickname was meant to be ironic, and he was in fact a young(er) king.

Although there are many other burials beneath the church and throughout the Jelling churchyard and nearby cemetery, the burial chamber only contained the single male body, and no others have been identified as or even theorized to be Thyra’s.

#### _The Runestones: Jelling 1 and Jelling 2_

Just outside of the south-facing front door of the church stand two large runestones—freestanding rocks with carved inscriptions—which, like the mounds, have been central to the public’s interest in the history of the Jelling dynasty and its earliest rulers. The smaller stone, Jelling 1 (DR 41), was raised by Gorm and solely commemorates Thyra: “kurmʀ kunukʀ k(a)(r)þi kubl þusi a(f)(t) þurui kunu sina tanmarkaʀ but” (King Gorm made this monument in memory of Thyra, his wife, Denmark’s strength/salvation).<sup>[\[16\]](#footnote-16)</sup> It dates to the mid-900s, but a more precise estimation has been debated for decades. _Danmarks Runeindskrifter_ (Runic Inscriptions of Denmark, hereafter “DR”), a monumental reference volume that originated in the early 1940s, dated it to ca. 900-950, whereas the modern and updated DR online database positions it more squarely between 940 and 955. The consensus now tends to reframe it slightly, to before 958/9, which corresponds to the dendrochronological dating of wooden beams discovered in Jelling’s North Mound burial chamber.<sup>[\[17\]](#footnote-17)</sup>

Made of gneiss, a type of metamorphic rock, Jelling 1 stands four and a half feet (139cm) tall off the ground with approximately another one and a half feet (47cm) of stone anchoring into the earth, is forty-two inches (107cm) at its widest point, and is nineteen inches (50cm) thick. The front of the stone carries roughly two-thirds of the inscription across three parallel vertical bands of evenly spaced younger futhark runes that are between six and eleven inches (16-29cm) tall and tell us that Gorm is honoring Thyra. A single band of runes marks the opposite side of the stone, proclaiming Thyra as Denmark’s salvation. The only ornamentation on the stone is at the end of the inscription and culminates in two small, almost imperceptible, snake heads. Weathering and erosion have occurred on both sides of the stone, fading the legibility of some of the individual runes, and eventually led to the Jelling 1 and Jelling 2 stones being sheltered from the elements, as well as excessively touchy tourists, inside climate-controlled glass cases in 2011.<sup>[\[18\]](#footnote-18)</sup>

Much larger and more intricate than Jelling 1, Jelling 2 (DR 42) memorializes the lives and deaths of both Thyra and Gorm and was sponsored by their son Harald, who additionally honored himself for his political and religious prowess: “haraltr kununkʀ baþ kaurua kubl þausi aft kurm faþur sin auk aft þa ̨urui muþur sina sa haraltr ias saʀ uan tanmaurk ala auk nuruiak auk t(a)ni (karþi) kristna” (King Harald ordered this monument made in memory of Gorm, his father, and in memory of Thyra, his mother; that Harald who won for himself all of Denmark and Norway and made the Danes Christian).<sup>[\[19\]](#footnote-19)</sup> Jelling 2 stands almost eight feet (243cm) tall, the width of its three sides varying between five feet (158cm) and nine and a half feet (290cm). The lengthy inscription is spaced unevenly across three sides, with the rune height varying between almost six and ten inches (14.5-25cm). Unlike Jelling 1, the inscription is horizontal, similar to a classic written text. Side A encompasses the bulk of the script, telling us over four lines that Harald Bluetooth raised this stone in honor of both of his parents and that he consolidated political power in Denmark. Sides B and C each have very short lines towards the bottom center of the stone, stating that Harald’s power extended to Norway, and culminates in a reference to the conversion of the Danes to Christianity. Jelling 2 is heavily ornamented, showcasing animals on side B, and an early Scandinavian depiction of Jesus on the cross on side C, all in a Mammen-style interlace design.<sup>[\[20\]](#footnote-20)</sup> Initial interpretations, including that of DR, date Jelling 2 to the later tenth century, ca. 980, following Harald’s death (Harald’s death year has since been updated to ca. 986). The case for his direct involvement in the stone’s sponsorship and erection is strong, however, and the date of the Jelling 2 stone was later amended to ca. 965-970, not long after Harald’s conversion, which occurred ca. 963.<sup>[\[21\]](#footnote-21)</sup>

Further studies have indicated that Jelling 2 remains _in situ_ exactly in the middle of the North and South Mounds. This was certainly an intentional choice on Harald’s part, who carefully planned the layout of each component of the monument complex. If both the North and South Mounds were representative cenotaphs, or indeed the burial places of Thyra and Gorm, it would make sense for Harald to situate the descriptive Jelling 2, nowadays the object most associated with the monument complex, nearest to them. Although Jelling 1 is currently located only a few feet west of Jelling 2, it is not _in situ_. In the early sixteenth century, Jelling 1 was discovered on its side, believed to have been used as a bench positioned just outside of the front door of the Jelling church, not far from its current location. Once it was determined to be a runestone, it was turned upright and placed next to Jelling 2, where it has remained since. Its original location can only be speculated upon.

#### _The Stone Ship Setting_

During the 1861 excavation into the South Mound, work was hindered dramatically when an exploratory intrusion was blocked some way down by a massive fieldstone, which was then split into two pieces by the work team and removed so that the tunnel could be continued.<sup>[\[22\]](#footnote-22)</sup> Further investigation during this excavation phase uncovered more large stones at the bottom of the mound, in a single straight line of about twenty feet. The 1941-2 excavations added to this discovery when almost the entirety of the South Mound’s area was uncovered, exposing the original stones of the 1861 investigation, as well as an additional line of uninscribed stones.<sup>[\[23\]](#footnote-23)</sup> In total, thirty-one stones were discovered under the South Mound, fourteen standing upright and _in situ_, and an additional twelve no longer _in situ_ due to toppling or further disruption.<sup>[\[24\]](#footnote-24)</sup> At least twenty-two of these stones were placed in two parallel lines, one on the west side and the other on the east side of the center of the mound, a total of eleven stones on either side running north to south.<sup>[\[25\]](#footnote-25)</sup>

The uninscribed stones under the South Mound were an incredible discovery. While multiple theories attempted to describe their meaning, including the suggestion that a large stone circle may have initially surrounded Jelling 2 and that the stones were attributed to a large triangular-shaped pagan ritual area called a _vi_, the possibility of a stone ship setting was proposed as early as 1909. Ship settings are a type of monument created by placing many stones, often of similar size and shape, strategically across the landscape in the tapered oval-like form of a Viking Age longship. As more stones were uncovered and mapped on the landscape, this theory gained traction. By the 1970s, it was agreed that the monolithic uninscribed stones found across the mound area were the makings of the earliest monument built at Jelling: a large ship setting. According to the placement of the stones, researchers surmised that the setting spanned from just south of the South Mound to just south of the North Mound and covered a distance from tip to tip of roughly five hundred feet (150m).<sup>[\[26\]](#footnote-26)</sup>

In 2006, a magnetometer survey of the northernmost section of the complex revealed several anomalies which, following trial excavations in the area, turned out to be eight additional large uninscribed stones similar to those found in the southern complex. The stones were no longer _in situ_, having been toppled over and intentionally buried at some point in the intervening centuries, but were very close to where they would have originally stood. These stones measured between five feet (1.5m) and seven feet (2.15m) tall and between three feet (0.9m) and almost five feet (1.45m) wide, similar in size to the South Mound stones.<sup>[\[27\]](#footnote-27)</sup> With this discovery, as well as subsequent discoveries of stones found near the North Mound and throughout the Jelling churchyard, it became apparent that all the stones originally shared an angle of purposeful placement. This meant that they all belonged to a single massive ship setting measuring nearly a quarter of a mile (1,168ft/356m) long, more than double what was originally theorized. In total, approximately 400 large unworked fieldstones would have been used to create the Jelling ship setting. They varied in size and shape (for example, the stones at the north and south ends were larger), but on average were somewhat rectangular and stood just over five feet (1.6m) tall, were three feet (0.9m) wide, and two feet (0.6m) thick.<sup>[\[28\]](#footnote-28)</sup>

Not only were researchers able to confirm that this was the largest ship setting in the world that has ever been discovered, but they were also able to validate it as the first monument built at the site, likely begun in the 940s and with a completion date of no later than 950.<sup>[\[29\]](#footnote-29)</sup> During this time, it would have taken up to six men plus a team of draft animals a full day to lift, move, and lower a single stone into its designated place. The entirety of the ship setting was on full display for about thirty years until the building of the South Mound engulfed the southern stones, rendering the monument’s importance secondary to the mounds and runestones, and even perhaps defunct.

Additionally, researchers were also able to confirm that the North Mound sat at the exact center of the ship setting, yet another instance of careful planning by Harald, who clearly had an eye for geometry. Ship settings are commonplace at Viking Age burial grounds, particularly ones that are royally connected, such as the Swedish site Anundshög, which dates between 500 and 1050 CE.<sup>[\[30\]](#footnote-30)</sup> Anundshög is a lot like Jelling; it contains the largest burial mound in Sweden, runestones honoring the death of supposed royals, and multiple ship settings. It is certainly possible that Harald visited Anundshög, witnessed the mounds and settings, and was inspired to create a larger and grander royal memorial.

Because of the obvious royal connection, the centrality of the North Mound, and the contemporaneous nature of the stone setting and Jelling 1, some scholars have posed that it is possible that Thyra’s memorial runestone was originally included in the Jelling ship setting.<sup>[\[31\]](#footnote-31)</sup> On Viking Age longships, the back of the ship is known as the stern and is where the steering mechanism, the rudder, is most usually located, although in some ships the rudder was more centralized. As a place from which the captain or another high-ranking crew member navigated the vessel through both turbulent and calm waters, manning the stern and rudder was representative of power. An example of this kind of placement can be found only a few miles from Jelling at Bække, where the Bække 2 (DR 30) runestone sits in this exact spot of a small-scale ship setting.<sup>[\[32\]](#footnote-32)</sup> Similarly, it has also been put forth that Jelling 1 could have initially been placed atop the North Mound, directly in the center of the ship setting, where on a real Viking Age ship the mast—the strong timber post that held the sails—would be positioned.<sup>[\[33\]](#footnote-33)</sup> Figuratively, then, if Thyra’s Jelling 1 acted as either the stern-stone or the mast-stone in the Jelling ship setting, could it perhaps be symbolic of her stalwart guidance of dynasty and kingdom? While only speculative, the connection between Jelling 1 and the ship setting seems fitting based on known Viking Age memorialization customs as well as the severe intentionality of Harald’s spatial planning.

#### _The Palisade and Outbuildings_

The final components of the Jelling Monument complex, a palisade enclosure and four small buildings, first made themselves known to researchers during the 2005 excavation season and continued to be uncovered through 2015.<sup>[\[34\]](#footnote-34)</sup> While the entirety of the palisade structure has not been fully revealed, extensive stretches of the northern and eastern sections, in tandem with shorter lengths of the southern and western sections, have determined that the monument site was surrounded by nearly a mile’s worth (1,440m) of perimeter wall in the shape of a parallelogram.<sup>[\[35\]](#footnote-35)</sup> Based on this finding, not only was the North Mound situated at the exact center of the ship setting, but it was also now at the exact center of the internal complex, bounded by the palisade wall.<sup>[\[36\]](#footnote-36)</sup> Its planning was meticulous; making up the wall itself were 4,800 vertical and horizontal timber planks that measured almost a foot (30cm) wide; 2,300 vertical timber posts spaced four feet (1.25m) apart in parallel lines provided support on both sides of the wall.<sup>[\[37\]](#footnote-37)</sup> Dendrochronological studies indicated that the timber used dated, on average, to ca. 968, meaning that the building of the complex boundary probably began as early as the building of the North Mound, ca. 960, and was completed in a single uninterrupted operation by ca. 975.<sup>[\[38\]](#footnote-38)</sup>

In the northeast quadrant of the palisade structure, four house-like buildings were also unearthed. Three were almost the same size (75x22ft/23x7m) and shape and were positioned parallel to the palisade walls on the northern, northeastern, and western boundaries, but the fourth building, also near the northeastern boundary, was about half the size (44x17ft/13.5x5.2m) and positioned at a right angle to the eastern wall.<sup>[\[39\]](#footnote-39)</sup> All four buildings show architectural characteristics that are typical of the Trelleborg style—timber buildings with narrower ends and bulbous sides, not dissimilar to the shape of a ship—albeit an early representation.<sup>[\[40\]](#footnote-40)</sup> Based on the dating of these structures, roughly the same as the palisade, ca. 968, these are the earliest examples of this style of building. Harald likely designed and utilized them as something of a blueprint for the larger and more comprehensive Trelleborg-style buildings that are found at the Danish ringforts, such as Trelleborg and Fyrkat, which he fashioned in the later period of his reign, ca. 980.

Despite the presence of buildings within the monument complex, however, there is no evidence to suggest that Thyra, Gorm, and Harald ever lived on site. No real artifacts that support permanent settlement have been discovered within the palisade boundary, and each building of the northeast quadrant has only turned up a few bits of hammer scale, a byproduct of ironworking.<sup>[\[41\]](#footnote-41)</sup> So far, the only purpose that can potentially be determined based upon the evidence found is that these buildings were used as workshops, or perhaps as some type of military barracks.

The palisade and the buildings fell into disrepair and disuse and were dismantled or burnt, unintentionally or otherwise, by ca. 1000, after only about forty years.<sup>[\[42\]](#footnote-42)</sup> The purpose of the Jelling Monument complex had now shifted from Harald’s vision of elite and exclusive representations of dynastic power to a more public-facing version. Yet it remained a site of ritual observation and royal connectedness due to the presence of the monuments, to the presence and growth of the Jelling church, and to the growth of the surrounding community.

### Thyra and Her Runestones

Context surrounding the Jelling monument complex helps us to understand the importance of the site and of Harald’s dynastic vision, but a closer look at specific material culture, in this case runestones, provides insight into Thyra more specifically. Without the implementation of both a wide view of runestones from the Scandinavian and Danish contexts in general, and a narrower view of Thyra’s runestones in particular, so much of what we are now able to discern about both cultural practices and individuals’ lives during the Viking Age would be lost.

The purposes of these runestones scattered across the early Scandinavian landscape were multi-faceted. First and foremost, they were commemorative monuments, tangible, physical objects crafted and positioned in such a way that individuals or groups could both create and perpetuate the eternal memory of a deceased loved one. An additional component to consider when examining the construction of monuments and the memorialization of specific people is the relationship that the sponsors of said monuments had with those being memorialized. It is generally agreed that the primary goal of the erection of a runestone was to confirm and perpetuate the elevated status of the dead, but it could also elevate the status of and/or maintain the already elevated status of the living sponsor. Runestones were expensive, were constructed by specialized craftsmen, and were heavy and difficult to transport and erect. For most people in Viking Age Scandinavia, it was an astounding feat to have the means to honor your dearly beloved dead in such a way, and in return receive that honor back upon yourself in life even once.<sup>[\[43\]](#footnote-43)</sup>

In addition to the clear personal commemorative and memorializing aspects of runestones, there were also important social components associated with their raising. Often their placement near public areas like roads, bridges, communities, and cemeteries ensured they would be visible to the greatest number of the population, and because of these placements runestones are often connected to theories of placemaking and the importance of landscape for social memory (the promotion of social memory through material culture will be explored in greater detail in Chapter Three).<sup>[\[44\]](#footnote-44)</sup>

We see some of these purposes playing out directly if we look closely at Jelling 1. Runestones were created to enhance the physical being, status, and power of the commemorated person, and so Jelling 1’s rectangular gneiss façade is a direct representation of Thyra’s royal and political power. The inscription, which covers the two broad sides of the stone, works in tandem with its size to enhance Thyra’s presence on earth and in death. As with any runestone, anyone who wishes to pay tribute must therefore encircle the stone and move their eyes up and down and across its substantial size to fully grasp its, and therefore Thyra’s, significance (this type of embodied engagement will be explored in more detail in Chapter Three). Similarly, Jelling 1’s placement, although we cannot be sure of exactly where within the complex it was initially placed during the Viking Age, would no doubt have been chosen intentionally to ensure that all who happened to witness it knew that Thyra was associated with the Jelling dynasty. As there were only a few farmsteads across the immediate landscape, the establishment of a royal runestone and later an entire monument complex ensured that Jelling as a place generally, and a royal place more specifically, was legitimized.<sup>[\[45\]](#footnote-45)</sup>

The chronology of runestones spans roughly a thousand years, with their popularity and purpose shifting depending on period and geographic location. New research has shown that the earliest inscribed monumental stones come from eastern Norway and can be radiocarbon-dated ca. BCE 50-275 CE, during the Pre-Roman and Roman Iron Ages.<sup>[\[46\]](#footnote-46)</sup> The practice of erecting runestones increased steadily throughout the Germanic Iron Age (ca. 400-700) and well into the Viking Age (ca. 750-1100), with which they are most typically associated. The Scandinavian corpus contains a tally of approximately 3000 runestones that are datable to the Viking Age. While most stones of this period appear in Sweden, the Danish aggregate equals roughly 260. <sup>[\[47\]](#footnote-47)</sup> The 1940s publication of DR divided the historical Danish runestones into four chronological periods, of which the Viking Age period was then further subdivided into an additional four: the Helnæs-Gørlev group (ca. 750-900); Pre-Jelling group (ca. 900); Jelling group (900-1000); and Christian Post-Jelling group (ca. 1000-1050).<sup>[\[48\]](#footnote-48)</sup> Extensive research in the years since DR was originally published has pushed the debates about runestone chronology forward. Now, there is general acceptance among scholars that the boundaries between the Viking Age stones are more fluid and difficult to pin down due to the shifting nature of the ornamentation, runic style, and linguistic usage. In recent years, DR has been adapted into an open access online database, and the chronological groupings of historical Danish runestones have been updated to reflect more modern understandings: Helnæs group (ca. 700-800); Gørlev group (ca.800-900); Pre-conversion group (ca. 900-970); Post-conversion group (ca. 970-1020/1025); and Bornholm group (ca. 1025-1125).<sup>[\[49\]](#footnote-49)</sup>

Until ca. 800, runestone inscriptions were created using the straight-lined twenty-four-character elder _fuþark_ (futhark). Over time the runic script evolved to the more simplified sixteen-character younger _fuþark_, and so too did the standard for Viking Age inscriptions across Scandinavia. The language of the inscriptions followed a well-established formula, one that securely linked the living sponsor to the status of the dead in addition to honoring their legacy: ‘X has raised this stone for Y.’ Interwoven into the inscription is often a sobriquet or honorific of the deceased, as well as their relationship to the sponsor; in almost all cases, runestones were raised for family members, but there are certain exceptions. The name of the sponsor tends to be prioritized on runestone inscriptions, and therefore stones become known as “\[Sponsor’s\] Stone.”<sup>[\[50\]](#footnote-50)</sup> When Christianity began to gain a foothold in Denmark in the late 900s, the inscription formula shifted somewhat and began to include requests for prayers on behalf of the soul of the deceased. Typically, Danish stones were less ornamented than their Swedish counterparts, but following conversion, more ornamentation began occurring in general, alongside more overt Christian iconography, such as crosses.<sup>[\[51\]](#footnote-51)</sup> Over a period of about one hundred years, this type of religious and cultural diffusion occurred throughout the region, moving upwards and across from the Jutland peninsula and eastern Denmark, and into Norway and Sweden, whose inhabitants held fiercely to their Norse pagan belief systems until the twelfth century.

The Danish corpus, in particular, also indicates that social accessibility coincided with the adoption of Christianity and political and cultural expansion. It is in the later, post-conversion period that the most stones in Denmark—approximately one hundred, roughly fifty percent of the Danish corpus—were erected.<sup>[\[52\]](#footnote-52)</sup> Whereas the earlier stones raised were more associated, although not exclusively, with royal or elite landholders, the explosion in runestones across Denmark during this period was sponsored by anyone and everyone who could afford them, thereby also cementing their social status as well as lineage. While a runestone could accompany a physical grave, they also often acted as physical stand-ins, homeland memorials for seasonal farmers who lost their lives while raiding abroad and whose bodies could not be returned to their families. In all cases, regardless of which rung of society a person fell into, runestones were symbols of power.

What role, then, did women play in this essential cultural commemorative art form and in what way were they memorialized? According to Birgit Sawyer’s monumental retrospective of Scandinavian runestone data, sex can be determined for seventy-seven percent of inscriptions. From this dataset, women appear most frequently as sponsors, either solely (11%) or in tandem with a co-sponsor (15%). In both cases, the commemorated were overwhelmingly male. These same data indicate that overall, women were commemorated solely at a scant four percent, but Sawyer is quick to point out that over time, women-only memorials became more common.<sup>[\[53\]](#footnote-53)</sup> In Denmark more specifically, the number of runestones from the pre-Christian Viking Age that mention women are fewer than ten in number. Of those ten runestones, a woman named Thyra is commemorated on at least four: Jelling 1 and Jelling 2, discussed above, as well as the Bække 1 (DR26) and Læborg (DR29) stones, and possibly the Horne stone (DR34).<sup>[\[54\]](#footnote-54)</sup>

*INSERT TABLE HERE*
Thyra’s Runestones.<sup>[\[55\]](#footnote-55)</sup>


#### _Bække 1, Læborg, and Horne Stones_

The runestones at Jelling place Thyra in direct connection with the site, her family, and her royal status, but two (and possibly three) others expand her geographic reach and introduce us to a new social connection in the form of stone sponsor Ravnunge-Tue.<sup>[\[56\]](#footnote-56)</sup> Almost twenty miles (30km) to the south of Jelling, the Bække 1 stone was raised for Thyra. Its original location is unknown but the stone was rediscovered in a churchyard embankment in 1810 and now sits alongside of the town’s major thoroughfare and just west of the modern church.<sup>[\[57\]](#footnote-57)</sup> It dates from ca. 950-975 and tells us that “rafnuka tufi auk futin auk knubli þaiʀ þriʀ kaþu þuriaʀ hauk” (Ravnunge-Tue and Fundin and Gnyple, these three made Thyra’s mound).<sup>[\[58\]](#footnote-58)</sup> Its oval-like façade stands just over five feet (164cm) off the ground, and is four feet (120cm) wide and two and a half feet (80cm) thick. Three lines of snaking _boustrophedon_ runes measuring between six and a half and seven and a half inches (16.5-19cm) begin in the lower righthand corner and end on the top left of the flat broad side of the stone.

Only a few short miles from Bække 1 is the Læborg stone which, like Bække 1, honors Thyra on behalf of Ravnunge-Tue: “rhafnukatufi hiau runaʀ þasi aft þurui trutnik sina” (Ravnunge-Tue cut these runes in memory of Thyra, his lady).<sup>[\[59\]](#footnote-59)</sup> Currently located in the Læborg church grounds, the stone was discovered in a field just to the north of the church and it has been presumed that it was originally erected by the nearby army road. Læborg’s dating is less certain, and the DR database only lists a very rough range of 900-1000; however, this could be honed a bit more delicately to the mid-900s based on the stone’s associated historical actors and objects. The stone is almost as tall as Jelling 2 at roughly eight feet (236cm) and is the skinniest of the bunch at two feet wide (64cm) and two and a half feet thick (76cm). Whereas the coloring of the other stones is a mottled greyish, Læborg is made of gneiss of a streaky rust color. The inscription runs _boustrophedon_ from the bottom to the top of side A and down from top to bottom of side B and varies in height between seven and a half inches (19.5cm) and eight and a half inches (22cm). Two Thor’s hammer ornamentations appear, one at the top of the stone near where the inscription turns and another at the end of the inscription. The appearance of such iconography has caused much debate over whether the stone’s dating should be considered staunchly pre-Christian. The consensus has generally been that due to the common carryover of certain pagan iconography into the Christian period, particularly the Thor’s hammer, it cannot be a determining factor in absolute dating.<sup>[\[60\]](#footnote-60)</sup> Like Jelling 1, the condition of Læborg is worse for wear, with intense erosion towards the top. In the nineteenth century, a chunk off the top of the B side inscription was found in a nearby field and delicately reattached to the surface. Additionally, deep circular worked holes appear at equal distances along the vertical length as well as at the top of the beginning of the inscription on the B side. The regularity of the size and spacing of these holes likely indicates some sort of purposeful workmanship, like splitting, rather than natural erosion.<sup>[\[61\]](#footnote-61)</sup>

The Horne stone fragment was found about forty-two miles (67.5km) due west of Jelling, and yet again, Ravnunge-Tue was its sponsor: _“..._fnukatufi kaþi hauk þ--...” (…Ravnunge-Tue made the mound…).<sup>[\[62\]](#footnote-62)</sup> The fragment is just over two feet (70cm) tall, just under two feet (60cm) wide, and about one and a half feet (52cm) thick and the original size is difficult to determine. Due to the way the inscription arches from right to left, also in _boustrophedon_ style, the fragment is likely from the very top of the stone. The runes are between four and six and a half inches (11-17cm) high. Because of the faintest presence of the thorn rune (þ ; makes the th sound) near the broken segment of stone, as well as the certain association with Ravnunge-Tue (who will be discussed in greater detail later), Thyra has been suggested as a possible subject. An additional possibility for who the Horne stone may be honoring is Thorgunn, who, according to the Randbøl stone (DR40) discovered near Bække and Læborg, was the wife of Tue-Steward, who is possibly the same aforementioned Ravnunge-Tue.

### (Re)Interpretations

Thyra’s presence in the archaeological record and thus her role in the Jelling dynasty and on the Danish political landscape has been debated for over a century. Jelling 1, in particular, has provoked significant discourse. In 1927, just over a decade after Ernest Rason considered Thyra’s historical identity (see Chapter One), historian Hans Brix proposed that due to his orthographical interpretation, _Danmarkarbót_ (Denmark’s Strength/Adornment) inscribed on Jelling 1 could instead refer to Gorm just as well as it could to Thyra.<sup>[\[63\]](#footnote-63)</sup> This theory quickly gained traction, and in some cases, Thyra was almost erased from the conversation altogether. The following year, 1928, Swedish professor Lauritz Wiebull also took up the case, concluding in his misogynistic article “Tyre Danmarkar bot” that, “In light of the meaning of the words _Danmarkar bot_ it is clear that these words are to be referred not to Tyre, but to Gorm. Tyre has slipped out of the saga of history. _Gorm Danmarkar bot_, the great king of the Icelandic sources … has slipped in instead.”<sup>[\[64\]](#footnote-64)</sup> To these men of the early twentieth century, it was unfathomable that a woman, particularly one from a culture that exuded masculine dominance, would be considered powerful and therefore honored in such a way, especially when there were kings so close at hand. The _Danmarks Runeindskrifter_ of 1942 also attributed _Danmarkar bot_ to Gorm rather than Thyra. Despite growing pushback that this was not the case, the Gorm “framing theory” remained generally accepted until 1985 when Erik Moltke, an original editor of the DR, thankfully reverted to a Thyra-centered interpretation in his book _Runes and Their Origin_.<sup>[\[65\]](#footnote-65)</sup>

Similarly contested—as early as 1827, only a few years after the first excavation into the North Mound—has been the connection between the Thyra of the Jelling Stones and the Thyra of the Bække-Læborg group of stones.<sup>[\[66\]](#footnote-66)</sup> It was obvious that Jelling 1 and Jelling 2 honored the same woman, but what about the Thyra mentioned on the Bække 1 and Læborg stones? The 1942 DR staunchly separated the two groups, indicating that because the name Thyra is mentioned on up to eight stones throughout Denmark, it was more likely that it was a common name rather than the same woman.<sup>[\[67\]](#footnote-67)</sup> This was not enough to deter further research, however, and again scholars examined and debated the dating and orthographic and lexical characteristics of the stones; particularly the meaning of the word _trutnik_ (modern Danish _drottning_: queen/lady) which appears on Læborg, and its usage by Ravnunge-Tue.

Much of the argument stems from the work of Birgit Sawyer, who across several articles as well as her book, _The Viking-Age Rune-Stones: Custom and Commemoration in Early Medieval Scandinavia_, proposed a resolution to these quandaries.<sup>[\[68\]](#footnote-68)</sup> There are linguistic inconsistencies, she notes, between Jelling 1 and Jelling 2. She surmised that because of these inconsistencies, Jelling 1 was likely not erected before Jelling 2, and certainly not by Gorm. Her theory technically agrees with what the textual sources say. While Aggesen does not indicate when in relation to one another Gorm and Thyra died, both Saxo and the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ tell us that Thyra outlived her husband, something which the inscription on Jelling 1 contradicts.<sup>[\[69\]](#footnote-69)</sup> Sawyer followed this line of thinking and instead proposed that because of the appearance of _trutnik_—which she defines as “wife,” in this case—on Læborg, following Gorm’s death Thyra married Ravnunge-Tue who had landholdings near both Læborg and Bække. Sawyer argues that upon Thyra’s death some years later, Ravnunge-Tue buried Thyra in a mound in the region and raised the Læborg and Bække 1 stones to honor her and the men who assisted him. Similarly, she says, it was instead, in fact, Harald who then erected Jelling 1 posthumously on behalf of his father, and also erected the South Mound to act as a cenotaph due to Thyra’s body having been buried elsewhere. With his mother having remarried and her own influence shifting away from the Jelling dynasty and towards a new family, this was Harald’s attempt to maintain his own grip on his royal standing, connection, and influence during a tumultuous tug-of-war against rival factions.<sup>[\[70\]](#footnote-70)</sup> In erecting Jelling 1, and further curating one of the greatest collections of Viking Age royal monuments at the Jelling complex, Harald was therefore able to solidify the powerful political connection between Gorm and Thyra and between himself and his parents, thereby justifying and showcasing his own legitimate rulership in the region.

Sawyer’s is a fascinating theory, and one that she makes fit snugly into her book which hypothesizes runestones as monuments of inheritance, but critics have been exceptionally vocal. Immediately following the publication of Sawyer’s works on the matter, other scholars quickly shot down the theory; Marie Stoklund, in one article, described it as “fallacious,” and in another regrets that no one shut Sawyer’s theory down before it gained as much traction as it did.<sup>[\[71\]](#footnote-71)</sup> Michael Lerche Nielsen, Marie Stoklund, and others argued against the theory. There was no evidence to support that _trutnik_ meant wife as opposed to queen or lady on the Læborg stone, and therefore Thyra had likely not been married to Ravnunge-Tue. There was no evidence to support Sawyer’s swapped dating of the Jelling Stones and therefore the possibility of Harald erecting Jelling 1 after Jelling 2. And additionally, despite there being some instances of runestones being utilized as monuments of inheritance, it was not a foregone conclusion here; first and foremost, runestones are meant to be interpreted as monuments honoring the dead.

It is rather easy to understand why Gorm and Harald would honor Thyra on Jelling 1 and Jelling 2 as bearers of the dynasty and immediate family members, but what is possibly more interesting is the presence of Ravnunge-Tue as sponsor of Thyra’s Læborg stone and as co-sponsor of the Bække 1 stone alongside two other men. Sawyer’s theory was again countered by the possibility that Ravnunge-Tue’s role was perhaps one of royal advisor, or steward, as denoted on the Randbøl stone (considering that it is the same man). If so, the term _trutnik_ would not have been used outside of the norm, for as a subordinate member of society it would have been appropriate for Ravnunge-Tue to regard Thyra as his lady or queen. It was also proposed that perhaps the mound that is mentioned on Bække 1 is either the North or South Mound at Jelling, as opposed to the significantly smaller mounds near Bække and Læborg, and that Ravnunge-Tue, Fundin, and Gnyple were members of the royal retinue tasked with its building and later honored Thyra and their own work back on their own lands. Additionally, however, it has been surmised that not only was Ravnunge-Tue the sponsor of the Bække 1, Læborg, and Horne stones, but that he was also the rune carver.<sup>[\[72\]](#footnote-72)</sup>

In a landmark 2023 study published in _Antiquity_, researchers from the National Museum of Denmark used 3D scanning, comparative groove analysis, and experimental archaeology to determine if there truly was a commonality in the rune carvers of the runestones and thereby a direct connection to Thyra.<sup>[\[73\]](#footnote-73)</sup> Analyzing the stones in this way is akin to paleography; every carver has a particular style, depth, and rhythm and it shows up as a kind of signature in their carvings, even centuries later. Carvers were typically members of workshops or guilds, each with similar yet distinctive carving patterns depending on who they learned from. Groove analysis can therefore offer evidence for whether a stone was carved by the same person, a person from the same workshop, or a carver (or carvers) from a different region and workshop entirely.

The museum’s analysis confirmed that Ravnunge-Tue was indeed the rune carver of at least two of the four runestones that mention Thyra by name: Jelling 2, and the Læborg stone.<sup>[\[74\]](#footnote-74)</sup> Jelling 1 shows characteristics that nearly match those on Jelling 2 and Læborg, but, due to the stone’s erosion, despite it being the most likely conclusion, the researchers could not wholly confirm that Ravnunge-Tue was also the rune carver for Jelling 1. Bække 1, on the other hand, falls into a grouping with Horne and Randbøl and was not carved by Ravnunge-Tue but instead probably by a colleague within the same workshop.

<table><tbody><tr><th><p><strong>Rune Carver</strong></p></th><th><p><strong>Runestones</strong></p></th></tr><tr><td><p>Ravnunge-Tue</p></td><td><ul><li>Jelling 2</li><li>Læborg</li></ul></td></tr><tr><td><p>Colleagues of Ravnunge-Tue</p></td><td><ul><li>Bække 1</li><li>Horne</li><li>Randbøl</li></ul></td></tr><tr><td><p>Undetermined (but likely Ravnunge-Tue)</p></td><td><ul><li>Jelling 1</li></ul></td></tr></tbody></table>
Table 2. Who carved the stones?

What this suggests, despite Jelling 1’s inconclusive results, is that Ravnunge-Tue and members of his workshop likely acted as the royal rune carvers whose artistic competence was trusted by both Gorm and later Harald to create an enduring material legacy in Thyra’s and the dynasty’s honor. This connection, therefore, also establishes that the Thyra memorialized on Jelling 1, Jelling 2, Bække 1, and Læborg is the same person. The National Museum scholars are hesitant to consider these results as indisputable proof, but the findings are incredibly promising and will lead to further research moving forward. For now, their cautiously optimistic interpretation is that Thyra was not only the most memorialized _woman_, but the most memorialized _person_ on runestones from Viking Age Denmark.

This is a serious finding that, if true, adds significantly to our understanding of Thyra’s identity and influence in the region of southern Jutland. Perhaps more than anything, it offers further research opportunities in which to explore the relationships between Thyra and Gorm, Thyra and Ravnunge-Tue, and Thyra and the Jutlandic community and political landscape. If we return to thinking about Thyra as hailing from a Danish noble family, as the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ suggests, rather than an English one, we can begin to imagine the possibilities. Maybe, just maybe, Thyra and Ravnunge-Tue were members of the same family.

### Conclusion

Without the willingness and ability of scholars to analyze and implement material culture as valid historical sources, the scope of Thyra’s legacy would be relegated to a few pages of textual history. Instead, her runestones and connection to the Jelling memorial complex reveal more about her life and death off the page by bringing her into the three-dimensional world. The history of the early Jelling dynasty is a complicated one full of political intrigue and upheaval, adoptions of a new faith, and perhaps misunderstood familial dynamics, but it is a history that includes an intriguing woman. The full detail of Thyra’s life via material culture is still unknown and might never be determined, but the material culture of her death acted as a catalyst for one of, if not the greatest monument of the Viking Age. Thyra’s importance to her family, as the matriarch of a dynasty, a wife, and the mother of a king, are clear through the stones at the Jelling monument complex. The stones of Ravnunge-Tue and the Bække-Læborg group indicate that this respect and perhaps even love extended further both across the physical landscape and through the people of early Denmark. All of this suggests a kind of power that is complementary to that hinted at within the written texts and brings our historical perception of this tenth-century woman into clearer focus.  


---

#### Footnotes

1. Mads Dengsø Jessen, Charlotta Lindblom, and Anne Pedersen, “Jelling Before Jelling,” in _Jelling_—_Monuments and Landscape_, ed. Anne Pedersen, Mads Dengsø Jessen, and Mads Kähler Holst, 2 vols., Publications from the National Museum, Studies in Archaeology & History 20:4, 1 Jelling Series (Odense: University Press of Southern Denmark, 2024), 385-414, at 386. [↑](#footnote-ref-1)

2. At this period, it was unusual for royals to maintain a single permanent residence. More often they would have traveled between their own various residences and those of their sworn chieftains. [↑](#footnote-ref-2)

3. Harald’s own royal capital was established at Roskilde, on the Danish island of Zealand, sometime in the 980s. The town remained the capital of Denmark until the 1400s. [↑](#footnote-ref-3)

4. “Jelling Mounds, Runic Stones, and Church,” UNESCO World Heritage Convention, accessed March 1, 2025, <https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/697/>. [↑](#footnote-ref-4)

5. Henrik Breuning-Madsen and Mads Kähler Holst, “The History of the North Mound,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Kähler Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 1:103-125, at 103. [↑](#footnote-ref-5)

6. Anne Pedersen and Mads Kähler Holst, “Jelling – An Introduction,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 1:7–38, at 7, 19; Breuning-Madsen and Holst, “The History of the North Mound,” 105. [↑](#footnote-ref-6)

7. Pedersen and Holst, “Jelling–An Introduction,” 19-22; Breuning-Madsen and Holst, “The History of the North Mound,” 105. [↑](#footnote-ref-7)

8. Pedersen and Holst, “Jelling–An Introduction,” 19. [↑](#footnote-ref-8)

9. Sverre Bagge, _Cross and Scepter: The Rise of the Scandinavian Kingdoms from the Vikings to the Reformation_ (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2014), 60. [↑](#footnote-ref-9)

10. Breuning-Madsen and Holst, “The History of the North Mound,” 123. [↑](#footnote-ref-10)

11. Jan Bill and Aoife Daly, “The Plundering of the Ship Graves from Oseberg and Gokstad: An Example of Power Politics?” _Antiquity_ 86 (2012): 808-24. Interestingly, it is Harald’s campaigns in Norway in the second half of the tenth century that were likely responsible for the plundering of these burials. [↑](#footnote-ref-11)

12. Mads Dengsø Jessen, Anne Pedersen, and Mads Kähler Holst, “The Buildings and Chamber Burial Beneath the Stone Church,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 1:275-312, at 281-2. [↑](#footnote-ref-12)

13. Jessen, Pedersen, and Holst, “The Buildings and Chamber Burial,” 278. [↑](#footnote-ref-13)

14. Jessen, Pedersen, and Holst, “The Buildings and Chamber Burial,” 291. [↑](#footnote-ref-14)

15. Jessen, Pedersen, and Holst, “The Buildings and Chamber Burial,” 282, 307; David M. Wilson and Ole Klindt-Jensen, _Viking Art_, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed. (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1980), 95-133. Named after the dynasty which bears its name, the Jelling style can be found on objects from ca. 900-1000. Its characteristic features are the ribbon-like S-shaped interlace animals, such as can be found on the Jelling cup and other objects from the North Mound. It is extremely similar to, and therefore seen as a precursor of, the Mammen style which appears around the year 950, coinciding with the early years of Harald’s reign and cultural and architectural program. The Mammen style also showcases ribbon-like animal motifs, such as lions and serpents, and can also incorporate leaf and tendril-like motifs. Jelling 2 is decorated in the Mammen style. [↑](#footnote-ref-15)

16. Lisbeth M. Imer, Laila Kitzler Åhfeldt, and Henrik Zedig, “A Lady of Leadership: 3D-Scanning of Runestones in Search of Queen Thyra and the Jelling Dynasty,” _Antiquity_ 97 (2023): 1262-78, at 1263; “DR41,” Rundata.info, accessed December 5, 2023, <https://rundata.info>. [↑](#footnote-ref-16)

17. Pedersen and Holst, “Jelling–An Introduction,” 29. [↑](#footnote-ref-17)

18. Mads Dengsø Jessen and Anne Pedersen, “The Rune Stone Investigations,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 1:313-32, at 313-15; “State of Convention,” UNESCO World Heritage Convention, accessed April 18, 2025, <https://whc.unesco.org/en/soc/697>. [↑](#footnote-ref-18)

19. Imer, Åhfeldt, and Zedig, “A Lady of Leadership,” 1263. Jelling 2 has been an incredibly important object in the establishment of Christianity and national identity in Denmark. It is known as the “Birth Certificate” of Denmark and since 1997 has held a central place on the Danish passport. As an archaeological object, Jelling 2 has been the subject of far more academic writing than Jelling 1, and therefore it will not be examined as thoroughly in this thesis. [↑](#footnote-ref-19)

20. See note 121. [↑](#footnote-ref-20)

21. Anne Pedersen, Mads Dengsø Jessen, and Mads Kähler Holst, “Royal Jelling,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 2:127-80, at 140. [↑](#footnote-ref-21)

22. Steen Wulff Andersen, “The Large Stones of Jelling: A Contribution to the Story of the Jelling Monuments,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 1:41-71, at 45. [↑](#footnote-ref-22)

23. During the 1941-2 excavation phase, stones were also discovered beneath the Jelling church, as described in the above subsection, “The Church.” [↑](#footnote-ref-23)

24. Andersen, “The Large Stones of Jelling,” 54. [↑](#footnote-ref-24)

25. Andersen, “The Large Stones of Jelling,” 47. [↑](#footnote-ref-25)

26. Andersen, “The Large Stones of Jelling,” 49. [↑](#footnote-ref-26)

27. Andersen, “The Large Stones of Jelling,” 51. [↑](#footnote-ref-27)

28. Andersen, “The Large Stones of Jelling,” 57. [↑](#footnote-ref-28)

29. Andersen, “The Large Stones of Jelling,” 54, 64. [↑](#footnote-ref-29)

30. “Welcome to Anundshög!” Anundshög: Ett Tusenarigt Maktcentrum, accessed March 10, 2025, <https://www.anundshog.se/>; Andersen, “The Large Stones of Jelling,” 65, 69. Many other ship settings at burial grounds exist in the region, including at Lindholm Høje near the city of Aalborg on the northern Jutland peninsula. Evidence of settlement and burial at Lindholm Høje spans between the fifth century and ca. 1200; the site contains approximately 700 graves. [↑](#footnote-ref-30)

31. “Rune Stones in Context 2011,” National Museum of Denmark, accessed December 5, 2023, <http://jelling.natmus.dk/en/about-the-project/sub-projects/rune-stones-in-context-2011/>; Andersen, “The Large Stones of Jelling,” 65; Charlotta Lindblom and Lisbeth Imer, “Jelling and Its Surroundings: The Archaeological Evidence,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 2:9-59, at 46. [↑](#footnote-ref-31)

32. Pedersen, Jessen, and Kähler Holst, “Royal Jelling,” 138-9. Bække 2 also honors a high-status, though not necessarily royal, woman. [↑](#footnote-ref-32)

33. Mast-stones are found at the center of the ship settings at Anundshög, among others. [↑](#footnote-ref-33)

34. Steen Wulff Andersen, Mads Dengsø Jessen, Peter Jensen Maring, and Anne Pedersen, “The Archaeological Investigations 2005-2015,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 1:149-60; Mads Dengsø Jessen, “The Palisade Houses of Jelling: Unique Features and the Ideal House,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 1:193-240. [↑](#footnote-ref-34)

35. Steen Wulff Andersen, Mads Dengsø Jessen, Charlotta Lindblom, and Anne Pedersen, “The Palisade and Gate,” in Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, _Jelling—Monuments and Landscape_, 1:161-92 at 171. [↑](#footnote-ref-35)

36. Andersen, Jessen, Maring, and Pedersen, “The Palisade and Gate,” 174-5; Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, “Royal Jelling,” 127. [↑](#footnote-ref-36)

37. Andersen, Jessen, Maring, and Pedersen, “The Palisade and Gate,” 171-2. [↑](#footnote-ref-37)

38. Andersen, Jessen, Lindblom, and Pedersen, “The Palisade and Gate,” 190. [↑](#footnote-ref-38)

39. Jessen, “The Palisade Houses of Jelling,” 193. [↑](#footnote-ref-39)

40. Jessen, “The Palisade Houses of Jelling,” 193; Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, “Royal Jelling,” 129; Anna Severine Beck, “Revisiting the Trelleborg House: A Discussion of House Types and Assemblages,” _Norwegian Archaeological Review_ 51 (2018): 142-61. [↑](#footnote-ref-40)

41. Jessen, “The Palisade Houses of Jelling,” 238-9. [↑](#footnote-ref-41)

42. Jessen, “The Palisade Houses of Jelling,” 238-9; Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, “Royal Jelling,” 142. [↑](#footnote-ref-42)

43. Julie Lund, “Rune Stones as Material Relations in Late Pagan and Early Christian Scandinavia,” _Danish Journal of Archaeology_ 9 (2020): 3-4; Birgit Sawyer, _The Viking-Age Rune-Stones: Custom and Commemoration in Early Medieval Scandinavia_ (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), 2. [↑](#footnote-ref-43)

44. Lund, “Rune Stones as Material Relations,” 3. [↑](#footnote-ref-44)

45. Pedersen, Jessen, and Holst, “Royal Jelling,” 134. [↑](#footnote-ref-45)

46. Steinar Solheim, Kristel Zilmer, Judyta Zawalska, Krister Sande Kristoffersen Vasshus, Anette Sand-Eriksen, Justin J. L. Kimball, and John Asbjørn Munch Havstein, “Inscribed Sandstone Fragments of Hole, Norway: Radiocarbon Dates Provide Insight into Rune-Stone Traditions,” _Antiquity_ 99 (2025): 1–18. <https://doi.org/10.15184/aqy.2024.225>. [↑](#footnote-ref-46)

47. Imer, Åhfeldt, and Zedig, “A Lady of Leadership,” 1265. [↑](#footnote-ref-47)

48. Lisbeth M. Imer, “The Danish Runestones_—_When and Where?” _Danish Journal of Archaeology_ 3 (2014):164-74, at 166. [↑](#footnote-ref-48)

49. Imer, “The Danish Runestones,” 173; “Runer.ku.dk,” University of Copenhagen, <https://runer.ku.dk/>. [↑](#footnote-ref-49)

50. This can be seen with both Jelling Stones. When not described together, or with their modern numerical affiliation, they are often called “Gorm’s Stone” and “Harald’s Stone.” [↑](#footnote-ref-50)

51. Evidence has also shown that alongside carved ornamentation, some runestones were also painted in bright primary colors. Red seems to have been the most common and its remnants are most usually seen today. Jelling 2 was one such example. [↑](#footnote-ref-51)

52. Imer, “The Danish Runestones,”171. [↑](#footnote-ref-52)

53. Sawyer, _The Viking-Age Rune Stones_, 35-6. It is possible that this percentage has changed, as Sawyer’s book was published over twenty years ago and the study that she was working from only included data that were complete as of 1995. This number does not include women who were commemorated on runestones alongside men (such as Gorm and Thyra together on Jelling 2), which would bring the total to seven percent. [↑](#footnote-ref-53)

54. Imer, Åhfeldt, and Zedig, “A Lady of Leadership,” 1265; From the Swedish corpus, a woman named Estrid is mentioned on six of eleven stones (U 101, U 136, U 137, U143, U 310, and U 329) that document her family history across the eleventh century. “Rundata.info,” accessed March 10, 2025, [www.rundata.info](http://www.rundata.info). [↑](#footnote-ref-54)

55. Table based on Imer, Åhfeldt, and Zedig, “A Lady of Leadership,” 1263. [↑](#footnote-ref-55)

56. Michael Lerche Nielsen, “Ravnunge-Tue som Navngiven Viking, Runstensrejser og Myte,” _Hikuin_ 31 (2005): 7-22, at 15. The name Ravnunge-Tue could indicate either a familial connection as Tue, Ravn’s descendant or perhaps a connection to a particular location, Tue, from Ravning. [↑](#footnote-ref-56)

57. Nielsen, “Ravnunge-Tue som Navngiven Viking,” 11. [↑](#footnote-ref-57)

58. Imer, Åhfeldt, and Zedig, “A Lady of Leadership,” 1263. [↑](#footnote-ref-58)

59. Imer, Åhfeldt, and Zedig, “A Lady of Leadership,” 1263. [↑](#footnote-ref-59)

60. Marie Stoklund, “Tolkningen af Bække-, Læborg-, og Jelling-indskrifterne og Meningen med at Rejse Runsten,” _Hikuin_ 32 (2002): 37-48, at 39-40; Nielsen, “Ravnunge-Tue som Navngiven Viking,” 14. [↑](#footnote-ref-60)

61. Nielsen, “Ravnunge-Tue som Navngiven Viking,” 11. [↑](#footnote-ref-61)

62. Imer, Åhfeldt, and Zedig, “A Lady of Leadership,” 1263. [↑](#footnote-ref-62)

63. Hans Brix, “The Inscription on the Older Jellinge Stone,” _Acta Philologica Scandinavica_ 2 (1927): 110-14; Anne Pedersen, “The Jelling Monuments—Ancient Royal Memorial and Modern World Heritage,” in _Runes and Their Secrets: Studies in Runology_, ed. Marie Stoklund, Michael Lerche Nielsen, Bente Homberg, and Gillian Fellows-Jensen (Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 2006): 283-313, at 287. [↑](#footnote-ref-63)

64. Lauritz Wiebull, “Tyre Danmarkar Bot,” _Scandia_ 1 (1927): 187-202, at 202 (“I belysning av den betydelse orden Danmarkar bot har är tydligt, att dessa ord är att fora inte till Tyre, utan till Gorm. Tyre är glide nut ur historiens saga. Gorm Danmarkar bot, de isländska källornas store tjodkonung … har glidit in i stället”). [↑](#footnote-ref-64)

65. Erik Moltke, _Runes and Their Origin: Denmark and Elsewhere_ (Copenhagen: The National Museum of Denmark, 1985), 207; Pedersen, “The Jelling Monuments,” 287. [↑](#footnote-ref-65)

66. Finn Magnusen, “Underretninger om Jellinges berømte Runestene, og flere i Omegnen, som synes at vedkomme Dronning Thyres Gravmæle,” _Antikvariske Annaler_ 4 (1827): 100–123. [↑](#footnote-ref-66)

67. Sawyer, _The Viking-Age Rune-Stones_, 162. This has since been disproven; see below. [↑](#footnote-ref-67)

68. Birgit Sawyer, _The Viking-Age Rune-Stones_; Birgit Sawyer, “Thyre, Harald, and Ravnunge-Tue,” _Hikuin_ 32 (2002): 31-6; Birgit and Peter Sawyer, “A Gormless History? The Jelling Dynasty Revisited,” in _Runica - Germanica – Mediaevalia_, ed. Wilhelm Heizmann and Astrid van Nahl (Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter, 2003), 689-706. [↑](#footnote-ref-68)

69. Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 679; Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _Jómsvíkinga Saga_, 77. Due to the pseudo-legendary nature of the textual sources (see Chapter One), this consideration should be taken with a grain of salt. [↑](#footnote-ref-69)

70. Sawyer, _The Viking-Age Rune Stones_, 158, 163-4. [↑](#footnote-ref-70)

71. Nielsen, “Ravnunge-Tue som Navngiven Viking,” 20; Stoklund, “Tolkningen af Bække-, Læborg-, og Jelling,” 46; Marie Stoklund, “Chronology and Typology of the Danish Runic Inscriptions,” in _Runes and Their Secrets_, ed. Stoklund et al., 355-383, at 370. According to Stoklund, Sawyer began publicizing her theory as early as 1994, six years prior to the release of her book. [↑](#footnote-ref-71)

72. Per Stille, “På vilka sätt kan runinskrifter höra samman?” _Hikuin_ 32 (2002): 23-30. [↑](#footnote-ref-72)

73. Imer, Åhfeldt, and Zedig, “A Lady of Leadership.” [↑](#footnote-ref-73)

74. Imer, Åhfeldt, and Zedig, “A Lady of Leadership,” 1263. [↑](#footnote-ref-74)
