---
layout: post
title: Introduction
description: 
image: 
nav-menu: false
show_tile: false
---


Sometime in the mid-tenth century on the Jutland peninsula of Denmark, the Viking Age Queen Thyra (d. ca. 958/9) passed away and the epithet _Danmarkarbót_—Denmark’s Adornment—was skillfully carved onto her memorial runestone. Upon completion of the carving, the large gneiss runestone was carefully transported from the runecarver’s workshop to the rolling plains of Jelling, where, once placed upon the ground, it transformed into a symbol of power and memory, setting the foundation for one of the greatest dynastic monuments in Viking Age history. Being honored in such a way in death implies that Thyra’s life and memory had great value, but who was she and what did she achieve during her time on earth? As the wife of Gorm the Old (r. ca. 936‒ca. 958/9) and mother of Harald “Bluetooth” Gormsson (r. ca. 958‒987), both rulers of Denmark and the progenitors of the Jelling dynasty, Thyra was no doubt familiar with, and perhaps involved in, matters of rulership, diplomacy, and politics during her lifetime. Yet Thyra’s story has been clouded by few and unreliable textual sources, by differing assessments of her familial background that have emerged from those sources, and by misrepresentations of the material culture relating to her.

In this thesis I will consider several overarching epistemological questions: how has Thyra been depicted over time? How did her contemporaries understand who she was as a woman, a queen, a daughter, a mother, or a political powerhouse, and in turn, how did they present her as such? What have both medieval and modern scholars come to understand about her and how has this been represented? The chapters following will explore three case studies of Thyra and her role within the Jelling dynasty through historical, archaeological, and museological lenses.

Chapter One investigates where, when, how, and even why Thyra appears in early written medieval texts, with a primary focus on Sven Aggesen’s _Brevis historia regum Dacie_ (A Short History of the Kings of Denmark), _Gesta Danorum_ (Deeds of the Danes) by Saxo Grammaticus, and the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ (Saga of the Jómsvikings). Two main themes arise from this exploration. First, is Thyra’s upbringing and familial background. The sources all provide different narratives as to who Thyra was prior to her life as Gorm’s wife and Denmark’s queen. The feasibility of each possibility is fully considered by analyzing additional historical evidence, and further questions of temporal and cultural connections arise. The second theme considers how Thyra is representational of both authorially depicted female exceptionalism and power throughout the textual sources. Specifically, Thyra’s power comes through the texts in three primary ways: as an interpreter of dreams, as a voice of reason and control, and as a political strategist and protector of the realm.

Chapter Two adds to our understanding of Thyra and the Jelling dynasty by exploring material culture as a primary source supplementary to the textual. By centering the material culture—with a particular focus on the Jelling monument complex and the runestones attributed to Thyra—I seek to clarify Thyra’s role and to demonstrate that the queen wielded greater influence on the security of her family’s dynasty, and of the greater Nordic medieval world, than has previously been recognized. This chapter will briefly explore the relationship between elite women, death, and commemoration during the Viking Age and provide a discussion of the National Museum of Denmark’s recent three-dimensional scanning and analysis of runestones that mention Thyra, and the attribution of these stones to the master carver Ravnunge-Tue.

Finally, I will conclude in Chapter Three by exploring the construction of cultural and social memory of the Viking Age over time through the lens of materiality. The themes of Chapters One and Two, textual-historical and archaeological source material of Thyra and the Jelling dynasty, will be re-evaluated using this framework, which includes not just the physical makeup of an object but also considers elements such as landscape and engagement. The third chapter will then examine how modern cultural heritage sites and museums, like those at present-day Jelling, construct and contribute to our current understanding of the medieval past via sensorial and embodied interactions with material culture. The thesis ends with a consideration of what this kind of analysis means for Thyra and the Jelling dynasty and offers further possibilities of where it can be applied in the future.

### Power and Exceptionalism

Significant scholarship has been dedicated to the study of elite female agency, power, queenship, and monarchical roles, and while this work is not necessarily an overt study of gendered power or queenship, I am tremendously indebted to those who have been its champions. In particular, the works of Marie Kelleher and Theresa Earenfight have helped shape which definitions of power I follow and why I typically prefer the term “power” over the often used “agency.”[^1] Kelleher succinctly states, “Just as we broadly define agency as the ability to take action that has the potential to affect one’s own destiny, then _we might construct a parallel definition of ‘power’ as the ability to take action that has the potential to affect the destiny of others_ (emphasis original).”[^2] Similarly, contributions to the edited volume _Medieval Elite Women and the Exercise of Power, 1100-1400_ have assisted in my formulation of this work by pushing back against both gendered definitions of power as well as the often sexist and misogynistic assumptions that powerful medieval women are exceptions to the norm.[^3] This thesis reflects the book’s primary objective in accepting “female public agency, authority, and power as a ‘non-story’ in medieval society, without losing sight of the predominant patriarchy and accepted misogyny.”[^4] Doing so allows for a more holistic and nuanced analysis of medieval women.

In the written sources, Thyra is certainly presented as exceptional and powerful, as so many medieval Norse women often are. Assuming a woman is exceptional just because she “made it” into a history written by men does not make her so. Analyzing her only through an exceptionalist lens diminishes Thyra’s own power and the power that other women of the Middle Ages, elite or otherwise, were capable of and succeeded in exercising. I do not question whether or not Thyra had access to agency or power, but rather, I question how the power and agency she exercised is represented throughout the sources. Thyra exercised authority within her context, just as women have historically done and continue to do, full stop.

### The Jelling Dynasty

The Jelling dynasty was a royal house that ruled in Denmark, and later Norway and England, for approximately 130 years between the early-tenth and mid-eleventh centuries. The dynasty is sometimes also referred to as the House of _Knýtlinga_ (Cnut’s Descendants) due to its most famous king, Cnut the Great (ca. 990-1035). The exact identity of the dynasty’s founder is not fully known, but according to the saga _Ragnarssona þáttr_ (The Tale of Ragnar’s Sons) he is said to have been Harthacnut I, the son of the mythical Sigurd Snake-In-The-Eye and father of Gorm the Old. Adam of Bremen’s _Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum_ (Deeds of the Archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen) and Snorri Sturluson’s _Heimskringla_ more or less agree that Harthacnut and Gorm were two different members of the same family, but Adam of Bremen morphs Harthacnut and Gorm into one person. The difference between the sources and the lack of any other corroborating evidence makes the truth difficult to determine. Regardless, the dynasty itself was firmly cemented in central Jutland by the mid-tenth century upon Gorm’s raising of the Jelling 1 stone (explored further in Chapter Two). The stone not only honors Thyra, but it is also the first time on a pre-Christian Viking Age runestone that the terms “king” and “Denmark” are used. {% include figure.html class="img-right" width="48%" caption="The Jelling Dynasty." src="images/jelling-dynasty-family-tree.jpg" %}

The early Jelling dynasty is characterized by Thyra and Gorm’s son Harald’s monumental, territorial, and religious expansion throughout the greater Danish landscape and into Norway. The runestone Jelling 2 (see Chapter Two) describes this conquest and explains that Harald brought Christianity to Denmark. The expansionist rule of Harald is often viewed as an example of the legitimization of not only his own kingship, but also that of his father, who is said to have been a “stranger-king,” one whose dynastic power was of external origin.[^5] The dynasty’s authority in the region, therefore, needed to be quickly validated as threats from elsewhere in Scandinavia as well as the Ottonian dynasty to the south, in present-day Germany, were vying for power.

The latter generations of the Jelling dynasty are defined by expansion westward from Denmark, with Harald’s son Sweyn “Forkbeard” briefly becoming King of England in 1013 following a military invasion. Forkbeard died shortly after, in 1014, at which point the English crown reverted back to English hands. The following year, Forkbeard’s son Cnut the Great followed in his father’s footsteps, invaded England, and regained the English crown for Denmark by 1016. Cnut reigned in England and Denmark, eventually adding the crown of Norway to his head, until 1035. Cnut’s son Harthacnut reigned in Denmark for seven years after his father, but his reign in England was unsteady and short-lived and only occurred after the death of his stepbrother Harold Harefoot in 1040. Similarly, following Cnut’s death, Norway was no longer under control of the Danes and by 1042 the sickly Harthacnut died, ending Danish rule in England as well as the Jelling dynastic line. The Jelling dynasty was therefore relatively short-lived, lasting from ca. 916 until 1042, but some of the most influential and recognized names from the Viking Age are counted among its ranks. This thesis offers a point of departure from the standard dynastic histories which highlight the male rulers, and instead will prioritize the life of one woman: Thyra, the mother of the Jelling dynasty and the first Queen of Denmark.

### A Note on Terminology and Names

Although, in modern popular culture, the term “Viking” has become synonymous with all people of medieval Scandinavia, the term is in fact a specific job description for people, often men, who would engage in seasonal seafaring, raiding, trading, and piracy. I instead prefer the more all-encompassing term Norse, which describes both the culture of and the people who lived in the Nordic regions (modern-day Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Iceland, Faroe Islands, Greenland, and parts of Ireland and the United Kingdom) during the Viking Age, which is loosely bookended between the years 750 and 1100. Scandinavia encompasses modern-day Denmark, Sweden, and Norway. Most of the content of this thesis is situated in the central and southern Jutland peninsula of Denmark. In most cases, I try to be as specific as possible when describing the location and geography of a place as it is now known. Regional boundaries were ever shifting, and nations and countries were not as we know them to be now, but for ease of readership, modern country names are prioritized for greater understanding.

The same is true for personal and place names discussed throughout. In most cases, I have chosen to prioritize the English version of names, again for readability, except when the original renderings of names have been maintained throughout prevalent academic scholarship. For example, Thyra is actually an Anglicized version of the Old Norse _Þyri_ or _Þyre_. From the runestones that mention her, however, her name is presented as ᚦᚢᚱᚢᛁ in runic script, transliterated as Thauri/Thorvi. In modern scholarship and translations of Old Norse into Latin and English, however, her name has more or less come through as various spellings of Thyra—Thyra, Thyre, Tyra, Thyri, Tyri, or Thyrwi.



---

#### Footnotes

[^1]: Marie A. Kelleher, “What Do We Mean by ‘Women and Power’?” _Medieval Feminist Forum_ 51 (2015): 104-115; Theresa Earenfight, “Highly Visible and Often Obscured: The Difficulty of Seeing Queens and Noble Women,” _Medieval Feminist Forum_ 44 (2008): 86-90; Theresa Earenfight, “Where Do We Go From Here? Some Thoughts on Power and Gender in the Middle Ages,” _Medieval Feminist Forum_ 51 (2015): 116-31; Theresa Earenfight, “Medieval Queenship,” _History Compass_ 15 (2017): 1-9. 

[^2]: Kelleher, “What Do We Mean by ‘Women and Power’?” 110.

[^3]: Heather J. Tanner, ed., _Medieval Elite Women and the Exercise of Power, 1100-1400: Moving Beyond the Exceptionalist Debate_ (Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2019).

[^4]: Heather J. Tanner, Laura L. Gathagan, and Lois L. Huneycutt, “Introduction,” in Tanner, _Medieval Elite Women_, 1-18, at 15.

[^5]: Andres Siegfried Dobat, “Viking Stranger-Kings: The Foreign as a Source of Power in Viking Age Scandinavia, or, Why There Was a Peacock in the Gokstad Ship Burial?” _Early Medieval Europe_ 23 (2015): 161-201, at 164.

