---
layout: post
title: "Chapter One: <br><i>'It is Customary to Relate the Deeds of Those Whose Reputation Stands High Above the Rest': Thyra in the Texts</i>" 
description: 
image: 
nav-menu: false
show_tile: false
---


Written medieval sources simultaneously offer the first clues and the first hurdles in our attempt to recover Thyra’s tenth-century life. It is immensely beneficial to have medieval authors representing medieval women in their work, but despite offering historical guidance their words must be carefully considered and supported with as much corroborating material as possible. This is certainly the case when regarding Thyra’s historical presence, as the earliest depictions of her were put in writing over two hundred years after her death; an ample amount of time for truths and constructed narratives to converge, divert, or be entirely fabricated before making their way into the written record.

Most of the evidence of Thyra’s existence, humanity, and power comes to us from several mostly contemporary, yet conflicting works from the late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries: _Brevis historia regum Dacie_ (A Short History of the Kings of Denmark) by Sven Aggesen (born ca. 1145), the famous historical tome _Gesta Danorum_ (Deeds of the Danes) by Saxo Grammaticus (1150–1220), the anonymously authored _Jómsvíkinga saga_, _Heimskringla_ by Snorri Sturluson (1179-1241), and the _Historia Norwegiæ_, written by an anonymous Norwegian monk.[^1] Completed ca. 1186, Aggesen’s _Historia_ is one of the first extensive and systematic written histories of Danish royalty written in Latin and spans the years 300 to 1185 CE.[^2] Aggesen came from a politically astute and well-connected Danish family which allowed him to have the best education and made it possible for him to access copies of Latin histories of France and the Holy Roman Empire. These works and perhaps Aggesen’s position in society, which included a placement among the court of Danish King Valdemar I (r. 1154–1182), inspired his own historical writing practice. He muses about this in the preface of his _Historia_:

>I sighed continually at the perpetual silence to which the mightiest achievements of our own kings and chiefs have been consigned. They were no less great in their merit and in their proven virtue, but their distinction has not been proclaimed aloud to the same extent.[^3]

Aggesen considers the quandary of truthfulness throughout his sources. “Therefore I shall attempt to commemorate those whose famous deeds I found to be known with more certainty.”[^4] He notes that although some of his accounts may perhaps appear mythological or fictional, he has done his due diligence by questioning appropriate officials.[^5]

Frustratingly, however, the two versions of the _Historia_ which survive are both later and flawed copies of the now lost original manuscript containing Aggesen’s accounts.[^6]The first manuscript— known as A or AM 33 4to —is an “inexpert copy” of an early version of Aggesen’s original, likely commissioned by the premodern Danish historian and poet Claus Lyschander (1558-1624).[^7] This copy now resides under the care of the Arnamagnæan Institute at the University of Copenhagen. The second, known as manuscript S, is a copy that was transcribed and edited in the thirteenth century by a monk, and then further compiled and edited for a printed version in the seventeenth century by the publisher Stephan J. Stephanius.[^8]Manuscript S was sadly lost in the Copenhagen Fire of 1728, which claimed nearly fifty percent of the medieval city, and with it, any further determinations on what changes to Aggesen’s original text were made by either editor. In 1917, M. C. Gertz published _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_ (Minor Writers of Danish History) and included X, Gertz’s own reconstruction and translation of the lost texts, which is now considered to be the “best” version of Aggesen’s works.[^9] Whether or not Thyra’s story in Aggesen’s _Historia_ is founded upon fact or instead was an amalgam of various historical moments will be forever debated. Despite this, someone, whether Aggesen himself or one of the many editorial voices that put their pens upon his work, found Thyra to be an essential inclusion in the documentation of Danish history.

Saxo Grammaticus’s _Gesta Danorum_ was completed ca. 1216, following Aggesen’s _Historia_ by about thirty years.[^10] The time span of _Gesta Danorum_ is even more expansive than the _Historia_, however, covering mythological, pre-historical, and historical events, highlighting the great and royal men (and women) of Denmark until ca. 1200. Saxo and Aggesen were contemporaries, and while it is uncertain if they interacted with one another personally, they belonged to a similar class, had similar interests, and certainly worked within the same sphere of influence. Some scholars have suggested that the two Danes were perhaps _contubernales_ (military tent companions), or even attended school together.[^11] At the very least, Aggesen knew of Saxo and his historical output, going so far as to mention Saxo’s contribution towards the end of his own _Historia_: “the noble Archbishop Absalon informed me that my colleague Saxo was working to describe at greater length the deeds of them all in a more elegant style.”[^12] Saxo, much like Aggesen, came from a well-known family that had served centuries of Danish kings as military men. Instead of being a member of the court himself, Saxo was in the employment of his benefactor, Absalon the archbishop of Lund (1177–1201), but the strong military spirit of his forebears is present throughout his writing.[^13] It is Absalon that Saxo credits, perhaps somewhat begrudgingly, for the impetus of _Gesta Danorum_, both as a sponsor and as an inspiration for content:

>Because other nations are in the habit of vaunting the fame of their achievements, and join in recollecting their ancestors, Absalon, archbishop of Denmark, had always been fired with a passionate zeal to glorify our fatherland; he would not allow it to go without some noble document of this kind and, since everyone else refused the task, the work of compiling a history of the Danes was thrown upon me, the least of his entourage; his powerful insistence forced my weak intellect to embark on a project too huge for my abilities.[^14]

In his preface, Saxo recognizes the _gravitas_ of his undertaking, remarking that he stands upon the shoulders of his Nordic ancestors and their oral historical and non-Latinized methods of knowledge preservation and dissemination. His own methods therefore amount to translations: “My chronicle, relying on these aids, should be recognized not as something freshly compiled but as the utterance of antiquity; this book is thereby guaranteed to give a faithful understanding of the past, not a frivolous glitter of style.”[^15] In this way Saxo is able to mildly grapple with the distinction between fact and fiction in the diffusion of history. Unlike Aggesen, who more carefully selected his historical actors, Saxo instead felt duty-bound to document everyone possible. Whether or not he had a particular affinity for Thyra’s supposed contributions to Danish history, or only viewed her as a necessary piece of his gargantuan puzzle, is unknown.

Thyra also appears in the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ (“The Saga of the Jómsvikings”), an Icelandic text with an unidentified author (or authors) that was similarly composed in the early 1200s.[^16] As with many sagas, _Jómsvíkinga saga_ is preserved across several different manuscripts and to varying degrees. The oldest preserved manuscript, AM 291 4to, from ca. 1300, contains a slightly longer version of the saga despite two missing leaves of parchment, and was translated into English in 2018 by Alison Finlay and Þórdís Edda Jóhannesdóttir.[^17] Two different English translations from the mid-twentieth century, by Lee M. Hollander in 1955 and Norman Blake in 1962, respectively, utilized the condensed version contained in the fourteenth-century Icelandic Holm. Perg. 7 4to manuscript.[^18] Additionally, the saga is preserved in the late fourteenth-century _Flateyjarbók_ (Copenhagen, Royal Library, 1005 fol.) as well as the mid-sixteenth century AM 510 4to. The saga is a comparatively short work in relation to Aggesen’s _Historia_ and Saxo’s _Gesta Danorum_, both in period covered and in length of text. The first half begins in the tenth century and relates the history of members of the Jelling dynasty, including primarily Thyra, before re-centering the narrative around a feud between Danish and Norwegian royalty and the establishment of an elite Viking force called the _Jómsvíkings_. Like many sagas, the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ stems from long established Nordic oral historical traditions that flirt with both fact and fiction throughout. Upon the Christianization of Iceland and the introduction of the written word, many monks began to transcribe the stories of their pre-Christian ancestors, albeit inserting motifs of their own faith into the accounts in the process, thus making it difficult to fully discern the interwoven historical reality of the sagas.

Two final historical accounts also mention Thyra, although briefly: the twelfth-century anonymously authored _Historia Norwegiæ_ and Snorri Sturluson’s thirteenth-century historical opus _Heimskringla_. Both works highlight Norwegian royal history, in which Thyra is only mentioned in passing because of her extended familial connections. Perhaps just as interesting as where and when Thyra _is_ mentioned is where and when she _is not_. For example, Adam of Bremen (d. ca. 1085), another eleventh-century chronicler whose work _Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum_ (Deeds of the Archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen) heavily details medieval Nordic history and culture, makes no mention of Thyra despite documenting narratives of her (supposed) father, husband, and son.[^19]

We must consider how Thyra and other historical figures, particularly women, were understood by her medieval, if not exactly tenth-century contemporaries, regardless of established fact or fictional account. These sources can assist in clearing the cloudy landscape of Thyra’s historical past, but they can never fully shine a light on who _exactly_ she was. To get anywhere near an accurate recovery, the above sources must be scoured and analyzed, read between the lines, and supplemented with further material culture evidence (see Chapter Two for a discussion on the material evidence attributed to Thyra).

### Female Representations and Exceptionalism in the Sources

Throughout the entirety of Aggesen’s _Historia_ there are only six mentions of other women aside from Thyra: three refer to women of lower social status, described only as “concubine,” the “daughter of a slain king,” and a group of “married women”; two are named historical Danish queens, Gunnhild (ca. 1020-1038) and Sophia (d. 1189); and finally the biblical Queen of Sheba, whom Aggesen indicates Thyra could have successfully emulated if only she had converted to Christianity. Sophia is Aggesen’s second-most mentioned and flattered woman, and with a grand total of three sentences he praises her: “Nature strove immoderately to enhance the utter loveliness of her appearance. For all the skill of the ancients would fail to describe her. However, I borrow no solicited opinions for the ‘blazoning of her beauty’ for many a time I used to see the much admired masterpiece of Nature with my own eyes.”[^20] It makes sense that Aggesen chose to highlight Sophia; she was queen during his lifetime, dying only a few years after the completion of his work. 

Women in the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ are a bit better represented, although they still fall into stereotypical feminine categories centered around men; sisters, daughters, wives, and mothers of warriors, jarls, and kings. Thyra is one of approximately another eleven women who are named throughout the work, most of whom only receive a single brief description such as “beautiful,” before being shuffled into narrative obscurity. Only two women aside from Thyra are given any story space. The first, Gunnhild, known as the _konungamóðir_ (Mother of Kings), is not necessarily written as exceptional, at least not in a positive light, but rather as ambitious and a potential threat to power and because of this she is murdered by fragile men.[^21] Ástríðr, the eldest daughter of King Búrizláfr, on the other hand, is said to be “very beautiful to look on and the cleverest.”[^22] Her cleverness shares striking parallels to Thyra’s representation in the saga; they are the only two women that have more than a few words of dialogue, allowing for their opinions to be shared, listened to, and possibly respected by the men that surround them.

Women in the _Gesta Danorum_ are great in number, but Saxo’s underlying, and in some cases overt, misogyny is on equal display. Saxo typically subscribed to binary ideals of gender, pushing forth the picture of strong and smart warrior men above obedient and subservient women who were inherently prone to duplicity.[^23] Despite this, he incorporated female characters into his narratives who counteracted his own norms; they are strong and smart and powerful, but regardless are almost always imbued with excess pride or were eventually found to be deceitful. Most of the roughly 175 women that Saxo mentions can be found in the mythical and pseudo-historical first half of _Gesta Danorum_, and are written expressly as such, not to be confused with the good Christian women that come after them.[^24] Throughout the second, historical half of the work, women tend to be mentioned only because they must be and always in relation to their husbands, fathers, and sons; their own societal or political contributions are erased. But for Saxo, appearing in the middle of his work, and as the first “Christian” queen, Thyra is something of an outlier.

### Thyra's Identity

Who was Thyra, then, and what kind of woman was she? Where was she born and who were her parents and siblings? Was she trained from childhood to be a good and doting wife to her future husband? Did she know that her husband would be a king? Did she enjoy the cold Scandinavian air on her face and in her hair? Would she practice _nålbinding_ (needle binding - a fiber art similar to knitting) by the light of the fire with the other girls and women when it was too cold and dark to go outside? Did she discuss matters of politics with her family or royal advisors and make decisions based on their advice? Sadly, we will never know the answers to many of these questions, and others will only be speculated upon.

According to the written sources, Thyra’s familial background and personal identity remain murky, and it is the divergences between Aggesen, Saxo, and the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ that have caused scholars to consider who she may have been and where she came from. Although Sven Aggesen wrote remarkably more about Thyra than Saxo or the _Jómsvíkinga saga_, and his writing certainly includes the most reverent tone, he makes no mention of her life prior to her marriage; she simply enters his story as the “glorious queen” of Gorm the Old.[^25] It is then between Saxo and the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ that the discourse surrounding Thyra’s questionable identity comes into play.

For Saxo, Thyra was born in England, the daughter of the Christian Anglo-Saxon king of Wessex, Æthelred I (r. 865–871), who was the elder brother of King Alfred (848–899). Thyra enters the history just as the Danish king Gorm is seeking out his future bride. Gorm sets his sights solely on her and following a courtship, the two are married and produce two sons, Knut and Harald.[^26] Saxo supports Thyra’s connection as Æthelred’s daughter primarily through the actions of her own sons as they violently raid her fatherland:

>Æthelred, delighted with his grandsons’ promise, gained pleasure from the violence they inflicted on him and welcomed this terrible outrage as though it were the most generous favor. He found much more virtue in their courageousness than in any respect for himself…. He could not doubt that some day they would invade foreign lands if they were now claiming their mother’s inheritance so boldly…. He passed over his daughter and bequeathed England to them [Knut and Harald] in his will ... since he knew that it was considerably finer and more fitting for men than women to handle a kingdom and reckoned that the position of his peace-loving daughter and his warlike grandsons should be kept distinct.[^27]

Here Saxo implies that at some point Æthelred held his daughter in high enough esteem to possibly consider her as an heir, but upon the arrival of her masculine, aggressive, and therefore preferable, sons, thought better of it. “In the event Thyra felt no grudge in being herself disinherited and seeing her sons made the legatees of her father’s possessions. She considered that their preferment would shed more honour than reproach upon herself.”[^28] Thyra’s acknowledgement and acceptance of this, therefore, represents the perfect image of a virtuous and composed Christian woman who understands her role as a supportive, proud mother and dutiful daughter in the patriarchal world of the tenth century.

Thyra as an Anglo-Saxon princess of England is an intriguing possibility, and if true it would significantly reshape much of what we know about the Wessex dynasty of the ninth and tenth centuries along with its connections to Viking Age Scandinavia.[^29] Throughout the Middle Ages, including in Anglo-Saxon England, one way that alliances were forged and secured was through marriage. Women, particularly royal and noble women, were duty bound in their role as peace-weavers to act as the physical manifestation of these unions, diplomats negotiating not only between families, but also regional and political boundaries.[^30] Perhaps the most famous examples of peace-weaving from an Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian context come to us from the epic poem _Beowulf_. [^31] In the poem, Wealhtheow, the wife of the Danish king Hrothgar, is said to be a liaison of peace between her own family and greater community and that of her husband. The term “peace-weaver” can offer a useful way to frame our understanding of women in general and women with power more specifically. But we must remember to consider that Saxo had a misogynistic and exceptionalist view of women and therefore continued to perpetuate the notion that Anglo-Saxon and Norse women were merely malleable playthings to be used for the political and societal gains of men.[^32]

Is it possible that Thyra could have been used as a bargaining chip? During the reign of Æthelred I, Danish forces of the Great Heathen Army were making significant inroads across the eastern part of England. Wessex was in a precarious position, often supporting its neighbors in battles against the incursions of Danes or attempting to petition for peace through other means. If the kingdom of Wessex was seeking a credible and non-violent strategy to stave off further assaults, a marriage alliance between the two parties would be beneficial. Saxo notes that Thyra requested that Gorm bestow upon her all of Denmark as a marriage gift, and if not, she would refuse him: “She laid one condition on her suitor: she declared that she could only marry him if she received Denmark as her wedding present. On these terms she became engaged to Gorm.”[^33] If Gorm and other Danes of his retinue had been pressured by the difficulties of invasion and were looking for a continued foothold for their advances in England, then offering his own homeland to a woman, even hyperbolically, might seem like a fair trade. And while Saxo’s misogyny prevails throughout his work, it is worth noting that in this instance, it is not Æthelred that sets the terms of the engagement, but Thyra.   

As culturally appropriate and fascinating as the prospect of Thyra’s Anglo-Saxon identity may be, there are significant complications to the theory. Importantly, no evidence has emerged to corroborate Saxo’s claims; his is the only source to give Thyra an Anglo-Saxon connection. Additionally, if Thyra did have an Anglo-Saxon heritage, it is unlikely that Æthelred I would have been her father. Æthelred had two sons: Æthelhelm (d. ca. 890) and Æthelwold (d. 902), both of whom were too young upon Æthelred’s death in 871 to succeed their father on the throne.  We know from the dating of Thyra’s memorial runestone Jelling 1 (to be discussed at length in Chapter Two), that she died roughly sometime between 940 and 958/9.[^34] If Thyra was indeed the youngest of Æthelred’s children, and conservatively speaking she had been born in or around the year of his death, she would have been between sixty-nine and eighty-four years of age at the time of her own passing. Though not an impossible consideration, particularly because high-status women tended to live longer lives than those of the lower classes, this seems a lofty estimation when the average life-expectancy of Nordic women of the Viking Age was only about fifty years.[^35]

On the other hand, in the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ Thyra is said to be the daughter of Harald “Klak” Halfdansson (ca. 785–852—from here on, Harald-Klak), the jarl of Holtstetuland, just south of the modern-day Danish border on the Jutland peninsula.[^36]  Similarly, Snorri Sturluson’s _Heimskringla_ only offers a brief glimpse at Thyra’s background, and also positions Harald-Klak as her father, and mentions that she had a sister named Thyrrni and a niece, Ragnhildr: “Ragnhildr’s mother was Þyrrni, daughter of King Klakk-Haraldr of Jutland and sister of Þyri Danmarkarbót, who was married to Gormr inn gamli, king of the Danes, who was ruling the realm of the Danes at that time.”[^37] Despite this change in upbringing, the framework for Thyra’s overall life story in the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ remains much the same as it is presented in Saxo’s version; she is married to Gorm, they produce two sons, and she imparts an exemplary model for Norse womanhood:

> He [Harald-Klak] had one daughter, who was called Þyri; she was the wisest of all women. She was also beautiful…. And now when Gormr was fully grown and had taken over the kingdom, he went out of the land and intended a match for himself, to ask for the daughter of Jarl Harald…. Gormr and Þyri had two sons, and the elder was called Knútr, and the younger Haraldr.[^38]

Unlike Saxo’s representation, however, the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ positions Thyra as adhering to the Norse religion rather than Christianity.

Harald-Klak is mentioned in several mostly contemporary ninth-century sources, primarily the _Royal Frankish Annals_ and Rimbert’s hagiographic work, _Vita Ansgarii_.[^39] These texts establish him firmly as an heir of a powerful Danish family embroiled in a power struggle and succession crisis for the kingship of the region. Harald-Klak succeeds, becoming co-king alongside his brother Ragnfrid ca. 812, before he is unseated and seeks protection from Louis the Pious (r. 813–840) in Francia a year later:

>Heirold and Reginfrid, kings of the Danes, had been defeated and expelled from their kingdom the year before by the sons of Godofrid, against whom they regrouped their forces and again made war. In this conflict Reginfrid and the oldest son of Godofrid were killed. When this had come to pass, Heirold despaired of his cause, came to the emperor, and put himself under his protection. The emperor received him and told him to go to Saxony and to wait for the proper time when he would be able to give him the help which Heirold had requested.[^40]

Thus began an unsteady but consistent partnership between the two men, with Louis agreeing to support Harald-Klak in his goal of regaining his power in Denmark in exchange for Harald-Klak’s conversion to Christianity and assistance in spreading the faith into Scandinavia. The entry for the year 826 in _Royal Frankish Annals_ states that “Heirold came with his wife and a great number of Danes and was baptized with his companions at St. Alban’s in Mainz.”[^41] This quote is important for two reasons: first, the occasion marks Harald-Klak as the very first Danish king who converted to the Christian faith, and second, sadly, it is the only time that there is even a whisper about the possibility of Thyra’s mother in the historical record. Despite an association with, and backing from Louis, however, Harald-Klak’s fight for royal power was never truly successful and he is said to have been executed by rivals in 852. The _Jómsvíkinga saga_ confirms Harald-Klak’s conversion as well as his departure from Denmark, stating that he left his estate to Thyra and Gorm’s son Knut, and never returned.[^42] 

Thyra as the daughter of an important Scandinavian jarl of the southern Jutland peninsula is as compelling as the English possibility. This example also showcases the importance of women as tokens of alliances in the Danish context. Thyra would have made an excellent match for any number of elite men, but marriage to an established king in Jutland, such as Gorm, further justifies Harald-Klak’s historical intentions of attempting to regain and secure political control in the region, if not directly for himself, then through his bloodline via his daughter. This potential parentage, however, is also not without its historical challenges and as with our first possibility, concrete dating is an ever-present complication in Thyra’s story. _Vita Ansgarii_ and the _Royal Frankish Annals_ situate Harald-Klak as having lived during the late eighth to mid-ninth centuries. Thyra and Gorm’s presence in textual sources is significantly more ambiguous, and often their periodization is only tenuously established due to context clues included by the authors. Their memorial runestones, however, situate them in the mid-tenth century, a significant jump from Harald-Klak’s historical life. If we accept that the written sources are correct and apply the same logic as above, saying that Thyra was born in the year of Harald-Klak’s death in 852, she would have been roughly one hundred years old at the time of her own passing.

In 1913, Captain Ernest Rason, an English military man and Viking Age scholar, brought up the conundrum of Thyra’s textual identity in an article he penned for _Saga-Book_. Utilizing the same textual sources that are available to us now, Saxo’s _Gesta Danorum_, the _Jómsvíkinga saga_, _Heimskringla_, and _Vita Ansgarii_, Rason attempted to date Thyra’s life and therefore, the likelihood of either her Nordic or Anglo-Saxon ancestry. Through an increasingly confusing analysis which regards the sagas as purely historical fact, and further conjecture covering wide and unclear date ranges, Rason does not evaluate the validity of the sources he is utilizing or consider any type of authorial bias. He surmises that in fact there must have been _two_ Thyras, one who was the daughter of Harald-Klak and the other who was the daughter of an Anglo-Saxon king, probably Æthelred I.[^43] Considering the supposed birth years of Thyra herself and Thyra and Gorm’s sons Knut and Harald, Rason concludes that these dates could not align with Harald-Klak’s daughter Thyra having been Harald’s mother, as it would have made her a geriatric who was incapable of childbirth at such an advanced age. Rason posits, therefore, that Gorm was likely married to both women in succession, with their marriages perhaps even overlapping, and that Harald-Klak’s Thyra gave birth to Knut, and Æthelred’s Thyra gave birth to Harald.[^44] Culturally, it is technically possible and there is evidence for Viking Age men having been married in succession to women that shared the same name. Halfdan the Black, who married Ragnhild, Thyra’s niece according to _Heimskringla_, married another woman named Ragnhild after the death of his first wife.[^45] Rason notes that his contributions are only the beginning of a larger conversation, perhaps not so subtly hinting at the complexity of the matter, and perhaps even expressing a desire to be proved wrong. Despite the criticisms that his theory prompts, he put forth an early and valiant effort in attempting to untangle this historical mess. His interpretation, amusing but probably flawed, shows that questions of Thyra’s identity have been considered by historians for centuries.   

Despite the inconsistencies regarding Thyra’s background in the written texts, there is still much that can be distilled from them. Even if these depictions do not fully present the truth, they help us to understand how the authors themselves viewed her and wanted her to be perceived by their readers. In turn, Thyra’s depictions not only become a reflection of her own historical potential, but also a lens that we can use to consider the lives of other early medieval women.

### Thyra's Exceptionalism and Representations of Power

While these three sources differ in their interpretation of Thyra’s identity, they collectively assert and agree that she was an exceptional woman, and analyses of their writing suggest that she had access to and utilized various modes of power. Aggesen spends consecutively more time recounting Thyra’s escapades than any other person—man or woman—in his _Historia_, proclaiming in a callback to his preface that “I cannot refrain from speaking of her laudable renown. For it is customary to relate the deeds of those whose reputation stands high above the rest.”[^46] Interestingly, Aggesen’s admiration of her is not further qualified, whereas Saxo renders Thyra as “excelling other _women_ in dignity and enterprise,” and the author of the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ positions her as the “wisest of all _women_.”[^47]

The three authors all prefer to include Thyra in their narratives over her husband, Gorm the Old. Aggesen includes him only long enough to mention that Gorm was an inactive king due to excessive drinking and philandering.[^48] Gorm is likewise little mentioned by Saxo and the _Jómsvíkinga saga_, and when he is, he is said to be a ruler of little consequence at best, and at worst is nicknamed “the most stupid.”[^49] Despite Gorm’s kingly position, all three sources instead credit Thyra with being the exemplary leader in the family; smart, cunning, honorable, and politically and strategically adept. Yet, as was expected of her, she was still a dutiful wife to Gorm. And although political power may have derived from her husband, the legacy of Thyra’s deeds rests squarely upon her own shoulders. Regardless of their exact motivations, the authors of these texts had their reasons to include Thyra so prominently in their work, and to elevate her perceived importance to such a high degree. Thyra’s exceptionalism and representations of power are showcased by the authors through three primary themes: Thyra as an interpreter of dreams, Thyra as a voice of reason and control, and Thyra as a political strategist and protector of the realm.

#### *Thyra as an Interpreter of Dreams*

While Thyra’s prophetic abilities are briefly alluded to in Aggesen’s Historia, her ability to interpret dreams is on full display in both Saxo’s Gesta Danorum and _Jómsvíkinga saga_. In _Jómsvíkinga saga_, as well as _Heimskringla_, prophesying and dream interpretation are hereditary; although Thyra’s abilities are superior, Harald-Klak also possesses the skill and so does Thyra’s supposed niece Ragnhildr.[^50] It is because of this ability that both Thyra’s union in marriage and childbearing are successful. In the _Jómsvíkinga saga_, Gorm sets his sights on Thyra and is intent on making her his bride, and contrary to established norms, Thyra alone can determine if she will accept Gorm’s offer, “And when he explained his business to the jarl, he [Harald-Klak] gave him the answer that she herself had to decide it.”[^51] Thyra responds that she cannot give an answer immediately and instead tasks Gorm with sleeping for three nights and then reporting back to her about the contents of his dreams, if indeed he dreamt at all:

> And now when the king urges the case with her, she answers thus: ‘This will not be decided on this occasion, and you must now go home on these terms with fine and honorable gifts, and if this match with me means much to you, as soon as you get home you must have a building built big enough for you to sleep in. The building must be placed where no building has been built before. And you must sleep there on the first winter nights and three nights altogether, and you must remember clearly afterwards whether you dreamed something, and then send men to see me to tell me your dreams, if there are any, and then I will declare to them whether you shall make this match or not. Now you have no need to pursue this match if you have no dreams.’[^52]

 Gorm does as he is instructed, and when his dreams are recounted to Thyra she deems him a worthy match and they are married.[^53]At their wedding feast, Gorm bids Thyra “that you interpret the dreams to entertain people, and show your wisdom by it.”[^54] In Gorm’s first dream the sea had receded dramatically from the land, so far that it could barely be seen. In the distance, three white oxen with large horns came out of the water and proceeded to eat all the grass on land, before eventually disappearing. The next night, he had the same dream, except that the oxen were red. The third and final dream too was the same, but with black oxen. Thyra offers her evaluation:

> Where the oxen walked up from the sea to the land, white in color, there will be three great winters, and such heavy snow will fall that famine will result all over Denmark. And where you thought the second three oxen walked up from the sea and they were red, there will come a second three winters of little snow, and yet not little, since you thought the oxen bit all the grass from the ground. And where three oxen, black in color, walked up out of the sea, there will come the third three winters. They will be so bad that everyone will say that none such shall be, and that such black dearth and need will come over the land that hardly another example can be found. And the fact that you thought the oxen had large horns signifies that many men will be stripped of everything they own. And the fact that they, the oxen, all went back into the sea as they had come out of it, and that you heard a great crash as the sea broke onto the land, signifies the strife of men of importance, and they will confront each other in Denmark and have great battles and fights here. I also expect that some of these men who will be present in this conflict will be closely related to you. And if you had dreamed on the first night what was in the last dream, the conflict would have happened in your lifetime. But there will be no harm now; I would not have gone with you if your dreams had been as I supposed earlier. But I will be able to do something to oppose all these dreams you have had about the famine.[^55]

In the years following their wedding, the famines arose just as Thyra predicted they would, but because of her foresight, the people of Denmark, supported by Thyra and Gorm, were able to adequately prepare for and outlast the difficulties. It is because of this beneficial clairvoyance that_ Thyra acquires her epithet the “Betterment of Denmark” in the _Jómsvíkinga saga_.[^56]

The saga further accentuates Thyra’s abilities in oneiromancy and political acumen in connection to the men in her life, primarily her father but also her husband, Gorm. Harald-Klak is said to have “thought all the government of the land depended on his daughter, and he allowed her to decide everything together with himself.”[^57] When he is pressed for his reasoning in allowing his daughter to make her own decisions, including her approval of a potential husband, he answers that it is “because she is much wiser than I.”[^58] Expressing this sort of sentiment not only speaks to her prophetic potential, but also justifies Thyra’s power and propensity for capable rulership and personal agency in front of people who can help or hinder her own success and the success of her family. The episode in which Thyra interprets Gorm’s dreams also illustrates that Gorm is trusting of her power. Although he can threaten Klak-Harald with violence and perhaps even “claim” Thyra as his bride rather than allowing her or her father to come to the agreement willingly, Gorm instead extends his courtship, indicating that he respects her abilities and hopes for the success of their union.

Saxo offers an additional story with a similar outcome. He tells us that following their wedding, Thyra is apprehensive about sharing Gorm’s marital bed until she is certain that the union will produce children, and therefore, security via lineage. “She was in fact determined not to indulge in love-making until she had learnt through some dream-omen that their union would be fruitful.”[^59] For three days she refuses Gorm’s advances, demonstrating a kind of Christian modesty that asserts her prophetic, feminine, and political powers. From this we can gather that Saxo’s Thyra was fully aware of her requisite duty and role in producing children for the continuation and stability of a royal line, but by relying on Gorm’s dreams to act as the catalyst of confirmation, she places joint responsibility upon her husband for their legacy:

> Because of a fortunate type of dream he soon tasted the joy his voluntary kindness had deferred. While his mind was sunk in slumber, he imagined that two birds, one larger than the other, fluttered forth out of his wife’s womb, then hovered in the air before soaring to the sky and after a short interval returned to perch one on each of his hands. A second and a third time, after refreshing themselves in a short rest, they took off with outstretched wings, till at last the smaller of them flew back to him alone, its feathers smeared with blood.[^60]

Gorm’s dreams prove to offer an acceptable outcome for Thyra:

> Thyra, understanding that she would be blessed with progeny, discarded the idea of putting off the consummation, eagerly renounced the virginity she had desperately implored him to preserve and, exchanging celibacy for sexual love, gave her husband the welcome chance to possess her; she compensated for his virtuous self-control by the total liberality with which she allowed him to consort with her, though she stated that she would not have become his true wife had she not gathered from the shadowy images of his dream a certainty that she would enjoy fertility.[^61]

Even through her acceptance that Gorm will indeed “claim” her, Thyra is resolute in her admission that this is only the case because of her own ability to ensure the outcome. Their union is consummated and Thyra and Gorm have two sons, Knut and Harald. [^62] 

During the pre-Christian Viking Age, prevailing Norse religious practices were often reliant on _seiðr_, loosely defined as sorcery, magic, or witchcraft, and the ability to interpret dreams successfully fell into this practice. While men could and did act as practitioners of the craft, women were at its center and far more commonplace.[^63]There was a loose hierarchy among female practitioners of _seiðr_; at the very top were the _vǫlur_ (_vǫlva_ singular; the term means “staff-bearer”), sorceresses of an elevated social class all their own.[^63] Often _vǫlur_ were itinerant, spreading their work and knowledge by traveling from town to town in search of those who needed their services. The evidence for this type of prescient women appears frequently in the sagas, and _Eiríks saga rauða_ (Eirik the Red’s Saga) gives us one of the best descriptions of a _vǫlva_: 

> In the district there lived a woman named Thorbjorg, a seeress who was called the ‘Little Prophetess’. She was one of ten sisters, all of whom had the gift of prophecy, and was the only one of them still alive.
> It was Thorbjorg’s custom to spend the winter visiting, one after another, farms to which she had been invited, mostly by people curious to learn of their own future or what was in store for the coming year….When she arrived one evening … she was wearing a black mantle with a strap, which was adorned with precious stones right down to the hem. About her neck she wore a string of glass beads and on her head a hood of black lambskin lined with white catskin. She bore a staff with a knob at the top, adorned with brass set with stones on top. About her waist she had a linked charm belt with a large purse. In it she kept the charms which she needed for her predictions. She wore calfskin boots lined with fur, with long, sturdy laces and large pewter knobs on the ends. On her hands she wore gloves of catskin, white and lined with fur.[^64]

One evening Thorbjorg performs her rituals while sitting on a raised platform and enlists the voice of a local woman who knows the appropriate chants and another group of women to form a “warding ring” of protection around her. Thorbjorg indicates that “many spirits had been attracted who thought the chant was fair to hear,” and tells the group witnessing the rite that “many things are now clear to me which were earlier concealed from both me and others.”[^65]Thorbjorg predicts that the illness and famine that were strangling this Greenlandic community would soon come to an end, and according to the saga, everything she predicted came true.

More recently, Norse women connected to the practice of _seiðr_ are being recovered in the archaeological record. These connections are typically made via material culture, and more specifically by the inclusion of metal staffs as grave goods. Across the Nordic region, more than fifty supposed-female graves have been uncovered that contain one of these iconic markers of the _vǫlur_ as described in the sagas.[^66] In his nineteenth-century excavation notes of the Birka chamber grave Bj. 660, Hjalmar Stolpe’s description of the staff found within echoes the style of Thorbjorg’s staff, as “an iron object with a bronze knob at one end.”[^67] Additional grave goods from Bj. 660 also indicate that the person buried within was dressed in female-gendered clothing of high status, such as oval-brooches and beaded necklaces, further connecting them to the elevated social class that the _vǫlur_ were privy to.[^68]

One did not have to be classified as a _vǫlva_ to interact with elements of _seiðr_, however, and dream interpretation was a way in which to do so. Based on the texts that we have access to, the evidence indicates that Thyra was not a _vǫlva_ in the classical sense, but perhaps a more casual type of practitioner, if she was one at all. The _Jómsvíkinga saga_ and the _Gesta Danorum_ both heavily ground Thyra’s identity in her ability to predict future events; because she can capitalize upon that ability to ensure her own future, the future of her family, and the future of her kingdom, she is able to command personal, familial, political, and diplomatic power.

Some scholars have argued that the inclusion of dream interpretation scenes in the sagas is nothing more than a fantastical plot device with no real basis in the historical reality of the period; a way to move the story forward, offer insider knowledge about a character, or to foreshadow later events. Thyra’s dream interpretation episodes in the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ and _Gesta Danorum_ certainly fulfill the needs of story movement (or in Saxo’s case, historical movement) and character development, but consideration of the historical context of the period in relation to such practices is equally important. Ignoring prevailing and overlapping religious practices of the period completely discredits the complexity and nuances of both the Norse belief system and the continuity of oral and written historical traditions that depict such acts.


#### *Thyra as a Voice of Reason and Control*

We see Thyra exercising power by acting as a voice of reason during moments of bubbling conflict surrounding the men in her life, most often in relation to her husband Gorm. The _Jómsvíkinga saga_ recounts several of these occurrences. Early in their marriage, Gorm became increasingly angry at his father-in-law, Harald-Klak, for not honoring his invitation to the royal Yule celebrations for three years in a row. Harald-Klak had every intention of attending the feasts, but each year upon departing his home he was met with bad omens for travel, forcing him and his retinue to turn around. Finally, Gorm was so upset with Harald-Klak that he began to devise an attack on Holtstetuland in retaliation for such a grievous insult. When Thyra discovers this, she assuages Gorm’s vengeful attitude, calling upon Gorm’s respect for her and their relationship, and for the love that Thyra holds for her father:

> And Queen Þyri learns of this intention of King Gormr’s, and she dissuaded him from it, “and it does not befit you,” she said, “to show him hostility, for the sake of me and of your relationship, and there will be a better solution in this case.” And now, with the persuasions of the queen, the king calms down somewhat and nothing came of the attack.[^69]

She suggests that the two men meet in person to discuss the matter. Her advice is heeded, the situation is diffused, and both men depart as friends once again.

This example makes a very good case for Thyra as a peace-weaver. Thyra can act in this diplomatic fashion because she not only understands the characters of both men and can therefore cautiously ease the situation using careful wording, but she is also aware of the tenuous hold that alliances have on potential political outcomes. If she had not been successful in reasoning with Gorm, she likely would have been forced to stand idly by while her husband waged war on her father, a man she clearly loved and respected. What began as an interpersonal feud would bleed over onto the political landscape of the Jutland peninsula and the greater Nordic geographic region, impacting and interrupting far more than just their family dynamics at holiday dinners.

The _Jómsvíkinga saga_ also tells us that years later while raiding, Knut is slain and his brother Harald returns home to Denmark alone.[^70] Harald reports Knut’s demise to Thyra in confidence, for Gorm had sworn an oath to kill the man who delivered news of his son’s death. With the understanding that the news of the death of Gorm’s favorite son and heir will be detrimental, Thyra attempts to mitigate any violent outbursts which would take her younger son from her as well:

> Haraldr now sent his foster-brother, who is named Haukr, to see his mother Þyri and take her the message that she should try to find some plan so that he could get out of this difficulty. A little later Haraldr goes himself to see his mother and tells her this news and asks her for advice. And she gave him the advice that he should go himself to see his father and tell him the news that two hawks had fought, one completely white, the other grey, and they were both valuable; but the outcome between them was that the white one was killed, which seemed a great loss.[^71]

Hearing this, however, Gorm does not understand the metaphor and continues to drink his ale. That night, in another careful attempt, Thyra orders that black mourning banners be placed throughout the hall: “She did this because it was the advice of discreet people at that time, when grievous news came to people’s ears, not to speak of it in words, but to act in the way that she now had people do.”[^72]The next morning, after seeing the change in the hall’s décor, Gorm confronts her:

 > Þyri sat in the other high seat next to the king. The king then began to speak and said: “You will have brought it about, Þyri,” he said, “that the hall is decorated in this way.”
> “Why do you think that more likely than not, my lord?” she said.
> “Because,” the king said, “you want to tell me in this way of the death of my son Knútr.”
> “Now you are telling me,” said the queen.[^73]

Thyra’s subtle craftiness is on display in both attempts to relay the message. By staging a way in which Gorm can conclude his son’s demise on his own, Thyra effectively saves the life of her youngest son and perhaps herself or any royal advisors who may have been caught in Gorm’s crosshairs. This kind of masterful emotional performance represents a specific and powerful kind of control over her son and husband, but also insinuates that Thyra is perfectly capable of molding the political narratives that are indicative of complex leadership.

#### *Thyra as a Political Strategist and Protector of the Realm*

Finally, the sources also portray Thyra’s power through her strategic skills, especially when faced with adversity, and credit her with the building of the famed Danevirke, a massive earthwork and timber fortification that spans a section of border between modern-day Denmark and Germany.[^74] The story’s inclusion in multiple texts paints a powerful picture of her. These texts each tell a different tale about how and why Thyra was compelled to order such a task, but doing so squarely positions her as a protector of the Danish people and kingdom, as well as the Jelling dynasty.

The section of Aggesen’s _Historia_ which discusses Thyra is almost entirely dedicated to her conceptualization and building of the Danevirke. According to Aggesen, while the Holy Roman Emperor Otto I (r. 936–973) was attempting to subjugate Denmark and embarrass Gorm for his ineptitudes in leadership, he pinpointed Thyra as Gorm’s weak link, someone he could potentially exploit for personal and political gain. Otto propositions Thyra, stating that she would make an excellent Empress:

> He even made a thorough attempt to ensnare the modesty of the above-mentioned queen to his wiles. He therefore sent envoys to meet the queen in private under the pretext of collecting tribute, and they were also given instructions to suggest to her that a queen of her surpassing beauty and prudence ought rather to be an empress, and rule over the Roman empire, than remain the queen of a tributary or no more than middling kingdom.[^75]

Otto clearly recognizes Thyra’s political potential but mistakes her strength and love of her country and husband as pride, vanity, and ambition. Thyra quickly agrees, accepting Otto’s offer: “Thus, when they asked her what answer they should take back to their lord, that far-famed and commendably virtuous lady, who alone deserved to be called queen, had devised a stratagem in her cunning mind….”[^76] Thyra asks for a three-year moratorium in which to atone for the severity of the transgressions she was about to commit, as defecting from her country and husband, a king no less, for another man was a grievous sin.[^77] Otto is amenable to this; hostages are exchanged to solidify the terms and the clock starts ticking.

In the meantime, Thyra dispatches a decree throughout the kingdom of Denmark, “that the entire population of the whole realm should be called together and assemble near Schleswig, and all those who had their abode within the kingdom were to set to work with their own hands to build a strong fortification with all speed.”[^78] Over the course of the three years, Thyra musters the physical strength of the realm, acting as a stern task-master with her commands and not allowing any of her subjects dispensation from their assigned labor. At the second-year mark, the emperor’s envoys return and are shocked when they are met with the blockade. Thyra again uses her cleverness and her understanding of men’s narrow views of smart women to thwart the confusion and concern of the envoys. She explains that by building the barricade, when it comes time for her departure it will keep the Danish army from following her to the emperor and will therefore keep Germany safe from any potential military retribution: “When the envoys heard this they greatly commended the cunning of the woman and went joyfully back to their own country, reassured that she would keep her promise.”[^79] Finally, when the Danevirke was completed and the three years were up, Otto sent his retinue to retrieve Thyra, but she rebuked them:

> “What the emperor demands, I deny. What he desires, I refuse. What he seeks, I avoid. I will not play the adulteress, and at once disgrace the kingdom, defame my sex, and dishonour the king. You reproach me with the king’s inactivity. You may be certain that this suits me very well. The whole kingdom obeys my wishes, and there is not a lawsuit or prosecution which is settled otherwise than at our pleasure. Thus, as you know, I am fully respected both as king and as queen. And you may rest assured that the king is highly distinguished in the nobility of his birth, for he is the offspring of kings on either side. Therefore, even if he cannot match the size of the emperor’s power, he is in no way inferior in his royal lineage. And to conclude my short speech: I shall forthwith liberate the Danes from the yoke of servile tribute, and they will owe you no further submission or respect whatever.”[^80]

Because of Thyra’s quick wit, and her ability to organize and garner the support and labor of the Danish people towards a common goal as well as to ensure the safety of the realm from further servitude, Thyra, according to Aggesen, earned her moniker as the “Ornament of Denmark” from her subjects.[^81] 

Aggesen includes an added layer to Thyra’s political power and guardianship, framing her as empathetic yet resolute in the difficult decisions she makes during this process. From the outset of Otto’s proposal and Thyra’s agreement, a hostage exchange took place to secure the arrangement. This was common practice in the Middle Ages, and the transference of elite or other important members of society ensured that all parties held to their word. Examples can be found from across the Nordic context, but perhaps most famously from Norse mythology, when two warring factions of gods, the_ Æsir and Vanir, exchange hostages to secure peace between them.[^82] Historically, the 812 entry in the _Royal Frankish Annals_ tells us that in an attempt at gaining power over his rivals, Harald-Klak requests peace from the Holy Roman Emperor. A year later, following agreeable terms for the Danes, Saxons, and Franks, Harald-Klak’s brother Hemming, who had previously been taken captive, is released.[^83] The Anglo-Saxon context also provides insight into this practice. Asser’s entry for the year 878 in the _Life of King Alfred_ explains that after defeating the Great Heathen Army at Edington, Alfred “took as many chosen hostages from them as he wanted. When they had been handed over, the Vikings swore in addition that they would leave his kingdom immediately, and Guthrum, their king, promised to accept Christianity and to receive baptism at King Alfred’s hand.”[^84]These were successful results for Harald-Klak and Alfred, but the outcome of hostage exchanges was not always a positive one. The _Life of King Alfred_ entry for 876, two years earlier, says that “one night, practicing their usual treachery … and paying no heed to the hostages, the oath and the promise of faith, they [the Danes] broke the treaty, [and] killed all the [hostages] they had.”[^85]

Thyra would have been aware of the possible consequences of her decision from the outset. As someone with prophetic ability, however, Aggesen says she was able to envision the outcome of the matter before its conclusion.[^86] She knew that the hostages she exchanged would be subject to death at the hands of their enemy. This foresight perhaps allowed Thyra the power to more carefully select which hostages she would send to Otto, and yet, also could have offered the chosen themselves some comfort before their departure. Despite the potential pain or guilt she could have felt, the well-being of her kingdom outweighed the death of a few.[^87]

Saxo also attributes the building of the Danevirke to Thyra, stating that “in order to make her country safer from surreptitious incursions by foreigners, Thyra set about cutting off with a rampart and ditch all the land that lies between Schleswig and the Ocean to the west.”[^88] Though he does not include an extended description of its building or the anecdote about Otto I’s attempted courtship, Saxo does, however, go on to state that:

> Because Thyra bore a man’s heart beneath a feminine exterior, she also freed Scania, pinned down under Swedish despotism, from the burden of rendering tribute. So, by repulsing her enemies on one flank with a wall, on the other with weapons, she brought an equally beneficial protection to the different borders of her fatherland.[^89]

It could be deduced from this that Thyra had a hand in assisting her son Harald with his own political and military ventures in the region, but sadly, there are no other sources available to corroborate Thyra’s involvement in any Swedish campaigns.

The vision that Aggesen portrays of Thyra outwitting the Holy Roman Emperor and organizing her country against further conquest makes for a dazzling tale, but one that is questionable when we further scrutinize the texts and incorporate archaeological evidence into the mix. This quandary presents as a two-pronged hurdle. We must consider both the chronology of Otto I’s reign and the emperor’s supposed involvement in Danish campaigns, as well as the archaeological dating of the Danevirke itself. Aside from Aggesen’s rendering of the tale, the evidence for Thyra having any direct connection with Otto I is non-existent. Thyra and the younger German were certainly contemporaries, and although he was king beginning in 936, Otto I did not begin his reign as emperor until 963, several years after Thyra and Gorm’s passing and during the reign of their son, Harald. Similarly, there is no historical evidence that Otto I had any interest in Denmark during the ten years of his imperial rule; he was far more preoccupied with the political affairs of continental Europe. Both his father Henry the Fowler (r. 919-936) and son Otto II (r. 973-983), however, did consider Denmark to be a region of great interest. It was Henry who in 934 captured the town of Schleswig in southern Jutland, and according to Adam of Bremen, forced Gorm and his fellow Danes into submission.[^90] Forty years later, in 974, Otto II defeated Harald Bluetooth in the same location.

From this vantage point, it seems more likely that if Thyra was to have had any involvement with a member of the Ottonian dynasty from a direct political standpoint, it would have been with Henry. It is possible that in his depiction of events Aggesen only muddled the timeline, getting father confused with son. What is perhaps more believable, though, discouraging as it may be, is that Aggesen either had faulty sources or he let his own displeasure at continued German political control in the region cloud his authorial accuracy.

Could Thyra have been an influential component in the building of the Danevirke regardless of the story connecting her to Otto? Maybe, but it is too difficult to say for certain. The Royal Frankish Annals give us the earliest written evidence of a fortification on the southern Jutland peninsula in the year 808. At the time, the Danish king Godfred (r. ca. 804-810) was embroiled in various military incursions against the Franks and the Obotrites (a Slavic confederation that inherited the Mecklenburg-Holstein region of Northern Germany). Following a victory, yet fearing retribution upon the Danes after their withdrawal from the continent, Godfred built a defensive wall near Hedeby.

> He weighed anchor and came with his whole army to the harbor of Schleswig. There he remained for a few days and decided to fortify the border of his kingdom against Saxony with a rampart, so that a protective bulwark would stretch from the eastern bay, called Ostarsalt, as far as the western sea, along the entire north bank of the River Eider and broken by a single gate through which wagons and horsemen would be able to leave and enter.[^91] 

The archaeological evidence, however, gives us a fuller picture of the Danevirke’s history. Stratigraphical analysis—the study of geographic layers—confirms that the earliest phase of construction began ca. 500 and consisted of a turf wall approximately five kilometers (three miles) in length.[^91] Dendrochronology—the dating of archaeological data using tree rings—has further confirmed that a second major stone and timber element was added to the initial turf wall in the mid-eighth century, and subsequent building phases in this period suggest that it is possible that Godfred could indeed have bolstered the wall’s supports in the early ninth century.[^92] Further excavations and radio-carbon dating also uncovered a gate in the Main Rampart wall along with a corresponding road studded with cart tracks, as well as an extension of the wall which encircled the port town of Hedeby, called the Semicircular Rampart, that date to the mid-tenth century. Additional building phases continued well into the medieval period, and the thirty-five-kilometer (twenty-one-mile) wall with its many forts, gates, and roads were utilized consistently until the late thirteenth century and even had a resurgence during military battles of the nineteenth century.[^93] 

The additions of the Danevirke dating to the late tenth century, including the Korvike, a disconnected section of wall to the south of Hedeby’s Semicircular Rampart, as well as the Connection Rampart, which brought together the Semicircular and Main Ramparts, have historically been attributed to Thyra’s enterprising son Harald Bluetooth, something that the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ corroborates.[^94] Harald’s penchant for monumental architecture, especially structures that have a defensive or militaristic purpose, is well documented (and will be explored further in Chapter Two); at least five _Trelleborgs_, large circular fortresses, have been discovered in Denmark alone, all dating towards the end of Harald’s reign, ca. 980.[^95] The exact dates of the tenth-century Danevirke Main Rampart additions, gate, and Semicircular Rampart have not been fully determined, but they could have been added earlier, leaving some hope that maybe Thyra had a role to play in the Danevirke’s construction and Denmark’s protection, after all, even if it was only to advise her son to reinforce the infrastructure already in place. There is no doubt that she would have been keenly aware of the Danevirke’s nearby presence and of its importance to the defensibility of the Jutland peninsula and the rest of Denmark. If in fact Thyra was the daughter of Harald-Klak, she probably grew up at Hedeby, the sight of the imposing defensive structure never too far off, perhaps reminding her of the fragile bottleneck that was tenth-century politics. Even if she were not the daughter of Harald-Klak but otherwise came from the Jutland region or even other parts of Danish territory, the threat of invasion or of the new religious influence pressing from the south would have certainly caused her to envision the Danevirke for its protective possibility and also as a tool for stable rulership and power.

### The Death of Thyra 

Just as they are with Thyra’s life, the sources are slightly misaligned regarding her death. The _Jómsvíkinga saga_ does not mention her passing at all. Aggesen and Saxo both recognize the magnitude of her death, but the specifics differ. Aggesen does not indicate a differentiation as to when Thyra and Gorm died in relation to one another and only recognizes that they lived long and happy lives, leaving Harald in charge of the dynasty after them.[^96] For Saxo, Thyra long outlives her husband, indicating that it is only after Gorm’s own passing that Thyra is able to build the Danevirke.[^97] For both, however, Thyra’s death rituals are noted, at least somewhat. Aggesen tells us that Harald buried his parents in matching mounds at Jelling, per the pagan custom. He even briefly mentions Harald’s intentions of raising a runestone atop Thyra’s mound, “in memory of her achievements.”[^98] Saxo too touches upon the influence that her death had, more specifically highlighting that Thyra’s loss was felt by more than just Harald:

> After this perished Thyra, the chief splendour of Denmark. Harald had her body borne in a magnificent funeral procession and amid everyone’s loud lamentations committed her to burial at a point not very distant from his father’s tomb. No one’s house could be devoid of sorrow at such a keen loss, for all were convinced that with the death of this individual the common prosperity of their country had breathed its last. One can now observe a shrine there, located between the companion tombs of husband and wife.[^98]

The respect and love that the local Jutlandic and greater communities of Denmark show for Thyra throughout this passage is clear. Thyra was a force during her life, and now in death, it was important that her power and influence be reflected appropriately.


### Conclusion

  The episodes regarding Thyra presented by Aggesen’s _Historia_, Saxo’s _Gesta Danorum_, and the _Jómsvíkinga saga_ tell us a great deal about who they thought she was. Reading these texts more critically as situated behind an exceptionalist or perhaps even misogynistic lens, we can, at the very least, begin to formulate what kind of person Thyra may have been and what kind of power she had access to and utilized. It is likely that we will never be able to untangle the mystery that is her true background, whether a Danish lady or an English princess. Her perceived and ultimately historicized character, however, comes through clearly. Thyra was a smart and powerful woman who was comfortable and capable in the world of tenth-century Danish politics. She offered her family and her nation stability and empathy through turbulent times. But what happens to this crafted textual narrative when multidisciplinary modes of exploration and interpretation come into play? Will Thyra’s fantastic façade be bolstered, or will it crumble beneath the weight of medieval exceptionalism?


---

#### Footnotes

[^1]: Sven Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” in _The Works of Sven Aggesen: Twelfth Century Danish Historian_, ed. Peter Foote and Anthony Faulkes, trans. Eric Christiansen, Viking Society for Northern Research Text Series 9 (Birmingham: University of Birmingham Press, 1992); Saxo Grammaticus, _Gesta Danorum: The History of the Danes_, vol. 1, ed. Karsten Friis-Jensen, trans. Peter Fisher (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015). All Latin translations of the _Gesta Danorum_ come from this edition; Alison Finlay and Þórdís Edda Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvikings: A Translation with Full Introduction_, Northern Medieval World (Kalamazoo: Medieval Institute Publications, 2018); Lee M. Hollander, ed., _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_ (Freeport, NY: Books for Libraries Press, 1971); N.F. Blake, ed. and trans., _The Saga of the Jomsvikings_ (London: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1962). Unless otherwise noted, Old Norse quotations of the _Jómsvíkinga Saga_ are based on Blake’s edition; Snorri Sturluson, _Heimskringla_, trans. Alison Finlay and Anthony Faulkes, vol. 1 (University College London: Viking Society for Northern Research, 2011); Inger Ekrem and Lars Boje Mortensen, eds., _Historia Norwegiæ_, trans. Peter Fisher (Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 2006).

[^2]: Only the _Chronicon Roskildense_ was produced earlier, by an unknown author, in 1137. The _Chronicon_ _Roskildense_ is a significantly shorter history of the Danish people and church, spanning the years 826 to 1157.

[^3]: M.C. Gertz, ed., _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_ (Copenhagen: The Society for the Publication of Sources of Danish History, 1917), 94 (“diurnis suspiraui gemitibus, nostrorum regum seu principum immanissima gesta eterno deputari silentio. Quippe, cum et illi inferiores non extiterint meritis et uirtutum experiencia, pari preconio non extiterunt eorum commendate excellencie”); Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 48. Unless specifically noted, for Aggesen all original Latin quotations come from Gertz, with English translations by Eric Christiansen as noted in Foote and Faulkes.

[^4]:  Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 48-9; Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_, 94 (“cum et regum titulos a se non ambigimus discrepare, quorum insignia gesta luce clarius perspexi, eos ad memoriam reuocare conatus sum”).

[^5]:  Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 48.

[^6]: Foote and Faulkes, _The Works of Sven Aggesen_, 4.

[^7]:  Foote and Faulkes, _The Works of Sven Aggesen_, 4.

[^8]:  Foote and Faulkes, _The Works of Sven Aggesen_, 4.

[^9]: Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_; Foote and Faulkes, _The Works of Sven Aggesen_, 30. Foote and Faulkes note in their introduction that they worked from Gertz’s X composition and translation.

[^10]: Foote and Faulkes, _The Works of Sven Aggesen_, 26.

[^11]: Foote and Faulkes, _The Works of Sven Aggesen_, 2.

[^12]: Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_, 124 (“illustri achipresule Absolone referente, contubernalis meus Saxo elegantiori stilo omnium gesta executurus prolixius insudabat”); Foote and Faulkes, _The Works of Sven Aggesen_, 65; Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, xxxv.

[^13]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, xxxi.

[^14]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 3 (“Cu cetere nationes rerum suarum titulis gloriari uoluptatemque ex maiorum recordatione percipere soleant, Danorum maximus pontifex Absalon patriam nostram, cuius illustrande maxima semper cupiditate flagrabat, eo claritatis et monumenti genere fraudari non passus mihi comitum suorum extremo ceteris operam abnuentibus res Danicas in historiam conferendi negocium intorsit, inopemque sensum maius uiribus opus ingredi crebre exhortationis imperio compulit”).

[^15]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 7 (“quibus scribendorum series subnixa non tam recenter conflata quam antiquitus edita cognoscatur, quia presens opus non nugacem sermonis luculentiam, sed fidelem uetustatis notitiam pollicetur”).

[^16]: Finlay and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvikings_; Hollander, _The Saga of the Jómsvikings_.

[^17]: Finlay and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvikings_, 25.

[^18]: Hollander, _The Saga of the Jómsvikings_, 24; Finlay and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvikings_, 1 and 25.

[^19]: Adam of Bremen, _History of the Archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen_, trans. Francis J. Tschan (New York: Columbia University Press, 1959).

[^20]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 73; Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_,140 (“cuius eximie pulcritudinis formam natura nimium studuit uenustare. Nam in eius descriptione (omnium ueterum) sincoparet peritia. Ad eius enim forme preconia mendicata non capesso suffragia numerosius (enim) nature satis admirandam fabricam oculata fide perspicabar”).

[^21]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 77-81. The _Historia Norwegiæ_ positions Gunnhild as the daughter of Thyra and Gorm. It is the only source which does so, but this is generally accepted by scholars. Gunnhild will be briefly touched on in Chapter Three.

[^22]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 125 (“var allfríð sjónum ok en vitrasta”).

[^23]: Bjørn Bandlien, “Saxo and Gender,” in _A Companion to Saxo Grammaticus_, The Northern World 97, ed. Thomas K. Heebøl-Holm and Lars Boje Mortensen (Leiden: Brill, 2024), 373-98 at 373.

[^24]: Bandlien, “Saxo and Gender,” 378.

[^25]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 56 (“illustris … regina”).

[^26]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 671; interestingly, Saxo also attributes an English ancestry to Gorm. Karsten Friis-Jensen notes (Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 670, footnote 30) that this could be an inconsistency in Saxo’s history, possibly duplicating Gorm in the historical record and making one of them English.

[^27]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 676-7 (“Quorum Edelradus ingeniis delectatus illatam a nepotibus uim uoluptatis loco habuit, amplissimi beneficii nomine teterrimam amplexatus iniuriam. Multo enim amplius uirtutis in eorum fortitudine quam pietate reposuit…. Non enim ambigere potuit, quin extera quandoque impetituri essent, qui materna tam audacter exigerent ... ut preterea filia Angliam iisdem testamento legaret … quoniam aliquanto speciosius mares quam foeminas regni usum decere nouerat, imbellis filie ac fortissimorum nepotum conditionem separandam existimans”).

[^28]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 676-7 (“Quo euenit, ut Thira filios suos paternorum bonorum heredes non inuidenter exheres ipsa conspiceret. Prelationem enim eorum honorabilem sibi magis quam contumeliosam fore arbitrata est”).

[^29]: The matter of the so-called “Second Viking Age” would therefore be a more complex issue of succession rather than purely conquest as Sweyn Haraldsson (r. 986–1014), also known as Sweyn Forkbeard, was Thyra’s grandson by Harald Bluetooth.

[^30]: “Peace-weaver” or _freoðuwebbe_ in Old English, is a literary term. It is possible that it was not used in daily life to describe the actions it details.

[^31]: Michael Alexander, trans., _Beowulf: A Verse Translation_ (London: Penguin Books, 2003).

[^32]: For a critique of the long-held view that Anglo-Saxon women were merely political pawns and “peace-weavers,” and that in fact the term is gender-neutral and not always relating to marriage alliances, see Alicia Ashley Sliva, “Departure from the Peace-Weaver: Rethinking the Power of Women in Medieval England” (master’s thesis, University of Houston-Clear Lake, 2017), ProQuest (10633334).

[^33]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 672-4 (“Conditionem proco attulit, non ante se ei nupturam prefata, quam Daniam sub dotis nomine recepisset. Eoque pacto intercedente Gormoni desponsa”).

[^34]: “SJy 10: Jelling Stone 1,” Danish Runic Inscriptions Database, accessed December 5, 2023, [https://runer.ku.dk/q.php?p=runer/genstande/genstand/39](https://runer.ku.dk/q.php?p=runer/genstande/genstand/39).

[^35]: “Children in the Viking Period,” National Museum of Denmark, accessed December 5, 2023, [https://en.natmus.dk/historical-knowledge/denmark/prehistoric-period-until-1050-ad/the-viking-age/the-people/children/](https://en.natmus.dk/historical-knowledge/denmark/prehistoric-period-until-1050-ad/the-viking-age/the-people/children/); “Viking Health,” National Museum of Denmark, accessed December 5, 2023, [https://en.natmus.dk/historical-knowledge/denmark/prehistoric-period-until-1050-ad/the-viking-age/the-people/health/](https://en.natmus.dk/historical-knowledge/denmark/prehistoric-period-until-1050-ad/the-viking-age/the-people/health/). Interestingly, Friis-Jensen posits that the Æthelred that is mentioned in Saxo as Thyra’s father is in fact Æthelred II, the Unready, which is even less of a possibility considering that he was born ca. 968, several years after Thyra’s death. See _Gesta Danorum_, 676, note 34.

[^36]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 69. Holtstetuland is the modern-day state of Schleswig-Holstein in Germany. Harald-Klak likely lived in or near and spent time in Hedeby, an important trading and political center in the region.

[^37]: Sturluson, _Heimskringla_, 51 (“Móðir Ragnhildar var Þyrrni, dóttir Klakk-Haralds konungs af Jótlandi, systir Þyri Danmarkarbótar, er átti Gormr inn gamli Danakonungr er þá reð Danaveldi í þann tíma”).

[^38]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 69-71; Blake, _The Saga of the Jomsvikings_, 2,4 (“Jarl átti dóttur er Þyri hét. Hon var spǫk at viti, kvenna fríðust at sjá…. Nú er Gormr rosknaðisk ok hafði tekit við konungdómi, þá ferr hann ór landi með mikinn her ok ætlar at biðja dóttur Haralds jarls…. Gormr konungr ok Þyri dróttning áttu tvá sonu; hét Knútr hinn ellri, en Haraldr hinn yngri”).

[^39]: Bernhard Walter Scholz, ed., “Royal Frankish Annals,” in _Carolingian Chronicles: Royal Frankish Annals and Nithard’s Histories_, translated by Barbara Rogers (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1970); Rimbert, _Anskar: The Apostle of the North 801–865_, ed. Charles H. Robinson (London: The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, 1921).

[^40]: Scholz, _Royal Frankish Annals_, 97-9; G. H. Pertz, ed., _Annales Regni Francorum_, Scriptores Rerum Germanicarum (Hanover: Impensis Bibliopolii Hahniani, 1895), 141 (“Harioldus et Reginfridus reges Danorum, qui anno superiore a filiis Godofridi victi et regno pulsi fuerunt, reparatis viribus iterum eis bellum intulerunt; in quo conflictu et Reginfridus et unus de filiis Godoridi, qui maior natu erat, interfectus est. Quo facto et se in manus illius commendavit; quem ille susceptum in Saxoniam ire et oportunum tempus exspectare iussit, quo ei, sicut petierat, auxilium ferre potuisset”). Unless otherwise noted, all Latin translations of the _Royal Frankish Annals_ come from Pertz.

[^41]: Scholz, _Royal Frankish Annals_, 119; Pertz, _Annales Regni Francorum_, 196-7 (“Eodem tempore Herioldus cum uxore et magna Danorum multidudine veniens Mogontiaci apud sanctum Albanum cum his, quos secum adduxit, baptizatus est”).

[^42]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 74-5; Hollander, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 38.

[^43]: Ernest Rason, “Thyra, Wife of Gorm the Old: Was She English or Danish?” _Saga-Book of the Viking Society for Northern Research_ 8 (1913): 285-301, at 301.

[^44]: Rason, “Thyra, Wife of Gorm the Old,” 291.

[^45]: Sturluson, _Heimsrkingla_, 49, 51.

[^46]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 56 (“Cuius gloriose laudis famam reticere non ualeo. Solent enim illorum gesta recenseri, qui prestantioris sunt fame”).

[^47]: Emphasis mine. Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 673 (“Illa … grauitate atque industria ante alias perstans”); Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 68-9 (“Hon var spǫk at viti”).

[^48]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 56.

[^49]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 672-3 (“stultissimus”).

[^50]:  Sturluson, _Heimskringla_, 51; Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 68.

[^51]:  Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 69; Blake, _The Saga of the Jomsvikings_, 2  (“Ok er hann hefir upp borit ørendi sín fyrir jarl, þa veitir jarl þau svǫr at hon skal sjálf ráða”).

[^52]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 69; Blake, _The Saga of the Jomsvikings_, 2 (“Konúngr skorar þá þetta mál við hana sjálfa. Þá segir hon svá: ‘Égi mun þetta ráðast at sinne ok skaltu fara heim með góðum gjǫfum ok virðuligum. En ef þér er um ráðahag við mik þá skaltu er þú kømr heim, láta gøra hús þar sem eigi hafi fyrr verit, þat er þér sé skapligt at sofa í. En þar skaltu sofa í vetranótt hina fyrstu ok þrjar nætr í samt. Ok mun glögt eptir, ef þik dreymir nokkvat, ok send síðan menn á minn fund, at þeir segi mér drauma þína, ef nokkorir ero, ok mon ek þá atkveða fyrir þeim, hvert þú skalt fá þetta ráð eðr égi; nú þarftu ekki at vitja ráðahags þessa, ef þik dreymir ekki’”).

[^53]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 69-71; Blake, _The Saga of the Jomsvikings_ (“En nú vil ek, dróttníng, at þú ráðir draumana til skemtanar mǫnnum, ok lýsir svá yfir vitrleik þínom”).

[^54]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 70.

[^55]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 70-1 (“‘þar er øxn gengu á land ór sjó hvítir, þar munu koma vetr þrír snæmiklir svá at af mun taka ár i Danmǫrku. En þar er upp gengu aðrir þrir øxn rauðir ðar munu koma aðrir þrir vetr snælitlir ok þó eigi góðir. Þa gengu upp hinir þrir øxn svartir, þar munu koma hinir þriðju vetr; þeir munu vera svá illir at engir munu muna þvílíka. Ok þat svarta hællreri mun koma at varla munu drœmi til finnask at slíkt hafi orðit. Ok þar er øxninir váru hyrndir mjǫk þar munu margir verða hornungar alls þess er eigu. Þa heyrðir þu brest mikinn af sjófargang. Þat mun vera fyrir ófriði stóreflismanna hér í landi ok þér nánir at frændsemi. Ok ef þik hefði þat dreymt hina fyrstu nótt sem nú var hina síðustu, þa mundi ófriðrinn verða a þinum dǫgum ok þa hefða ek eigi gengit með þer. En við hallæri mun ek gørt geta’”).

[^56]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 71 (“Danmarkarbót”). _Danmarkarbót_ is sometimes also translated as “Ornament,” “Strength,” or “Adornment” of Denmark.

[^57]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 69; Blake, _The Saga of the Jomsvikings_, 4 (“Jarl unni henni miki ok þar þóttisk han eiga ǫll landráð, sem hon var”).

[^58]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 69; Blake, _The Saga of the Jomsvikings_, 2 (“því at hon er miklu vitrari en ek”).

[^59]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 672-3 (“non ante rebus Veneriis indulgere constituens, quam matrimonium creandis liberis efficax futurum aliquo per quietem presagio didicisset”).

[^60]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 674-5 (“Sed uoluptatem, quam gratuita humanitate distulit, mox leta somnii specie delibauit. Quippe profuso in somnum animo existimauit duos alites coniugis sue genitali parte prolapsos, sed alterum altero grandiorem, corpora superne librantes prepeti coelum uolatu petere exiguoque tempore interiecto reuersos suis altrinsecus manibus insedisse. Secundo quoque ac tertio paruula quiete recreatos propassis alis aeri se credidisse, tandemque minorem ex his ad se pennis cruore oblitis comite uacuum remeasse”).

[^61]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 674-5 (“Thira felicem se prole futuram autumans omisso differendarum nuptiarum proposito castimoniam, quam cupide precata fuerat, auidius remisit, coelibatumque ad uenerem transferens sponso gratam suimet potiende copiam tribuit, continentis animi uirtutem admissi concubitus satietate pensando, prefata minime se ei nupturam fuisse, nisi ex his adumbrate quietis imaginibus certiorem foecunditatis sue fortunam hausisset”).

[^62]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 671.

[^63]: For more information about Norse religion and the complexities and nuances of _seiðr_ and other related practices, see the works of Neil Price: Neil Price, _The Viking Way: Magic and Mind in Late Iron Age Scandinavia_, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2019); Neil Price, _The Children of Ash and Elm: A History of the Vikings_ (New York: Basic Books, 2020); Neil Price, “Sorcery and Circumpolar Traditions in Old Norse Belief,” in _The Viking World_, ed. Stefan Brink and Neil Price (London: Routledge, 2009), 244-8.

[^64]: Price, _The Viking Way_, 133; Price, “Sorcery and Circumpolar Traditions in Old Norse Belief,” 245; Price, _Children of Ash and Elm_, 224.

[^65]: Keneva Kunz, trans., “Eirik the Red’s Saga,” in _The Sagas of Icelanders: A Selection_, ed. Jane Smiley (London: Penguin, 2001), 653-74 at 658 (“Sú kona var þar í byggð, er Þorbjörg hét. Hon var spákona ok var kölluð lítilvölva. Hon hafði átt sér níu systr, ok váru allar spákonur, en hon ein var þá á lífi. Þat var háttr Þorbjargar um vetrum, at hon fór at veizlum, ok buðu þeir menn henni mest heim, er forvitni var á at vita forlög sín eða árferð. En er hon kom um kveldit ok sá maðr,  þá var hon svá búin, at hon hafði yfir sér tuglamöttul blán, ok var settr steinum allt í skaut ofan. Hon hafði á hálsi sér glertölur, lambskinnskofra svartan á höfði ok við innan kattarskinn hvít. Ok hon hafði staf í hendi, ok var á knappr. Hann var búinn með messingu ok settr steinum ofan um knappinn. Hon hafði um sik hnjóskulinda, ok var þar á skjóðupungr mikill, ok varðveitti hon þar í töfr sín, þau er hon þurfti til fróðleiks at hafa. Hon hafði á fótum kálfskinnsskúa loðna ok í þvengi langa ok á tinknappar miklir á endunum. Hon hafði á höndum sér kattskinnsglófa, ok váru hvítir innan ok loðnir”).

[^66]: Kunz, “Eirik the Red’s Saga,” 659 (“kvað margar þær náttúrur nú til hafa sótt ok þykkja fagrt at heyra”; “En mér eru nú margir þeir hlutir auðsýnir, er áðr var ek duldið, ok margir aðrir”).

[^67]: Price, _Children of Ash and Elm_, 223. Assigning a sex or gender to a burial purely based on grave goods is inherently problematic. In the case of those with an association to _vǫlur_, it is also possible that these practitioners were what we would now call non-binary people, trans women, cross-dressing men, or something else entirely.

[^68]: Price, _The Viking Way_, 88.

[^69]: Price, _The Viking Way_, 88.

[^70]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 73 (“Ok þessarrar fyrirætlanar Gorms konúngs verðr Þyre drotníng vör, ok talðe ofan þessa fyrirætlan: ok samir þér eigi, segir hún, at gera honum ófríð fyrir vanda sakir ok tengda ykkarra, ok liggja hértil miklo betri orráð um þetta mál. Ok nú af fyrirtölum drotníngar, þá sefast konúngr nakkvat svá, ok eyðist herförin”).

[^71]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 76. The _Jómsvíkinga saga_ says that Knut died in England, while other sources say his death occurred in Ireland.

[^72]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 76.

[^74]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 76.

[^75]: Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 77.

[^76]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 58; Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 689.

[^77]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 56; Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_, 108, 110 (“Quippe supra memorate regine pudicitiam pertemptauit illecebris irretire. Missis itaque legatis, qui sub specie censum colligendi in conclaui reginam conueniant, iussi sunt etiam regine suggerere, quatenus eam ob eximiam speciositatis formam et animi prudentiam Romano deceat potius imperare imperio et imperatricem existere quam uel tributariam uel saltem modici fore regni regiam”).

[^78]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 57; Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_, 110 (“Sciscitantibus (ergo) illis, quodnam responsum domino renuntiarent, uirtute commendabili precluis illa, qua sola regina dici meruit, pectorisque solertia dolum commentata”).

[^79]: While adultery was a serious offence, it was not considered inherently “sinful” until the adoption of Christianity. In pre-Christian Norse contexts, if either wives or husbands were unfaithful, legal recourse could be enacted and the adulterer and their partner in the act could be put to death.

[^80]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 58; Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_, 112 (“ut totius regni uniuerso populo corrogato una (prope Slesuik) conueniant, ut ipsi omnes, quorum in regno essent domicilia, propriis satagant manibus elaborare, quatenus (maniminis) firmitudo celerius construatur”).

[^81]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 59; Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_, 114 (“Quo excepto legati mulieris opido commendabant astutiam; et iam de uoto securi hylares ad propria repedabant. Interea regina operi uehementius instabat inchoato”).

[^82]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 60; Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_, 114, 116 (“‘Quod exigit imperator, renuto; quod cupit, recuso; quod affectat, deuito, ne simul adultera regno faciam obprobrium, sexui uerecundiam, regi improperium. Nam quod regis mihi desidiam obicitis, (hanc mihi) haut aduersari (non) ambigatis, cum nutibus meis regnum famuletur uniuersum, et nihil questionis uel controuersie absque nostra terminetur conuenientia, ita ut regis pariter et regine me sciatis honore pouere. Regem enim hac sciatis generositate florere, ut regum undique sit sobole procreatus; unde, licet magnitudini imperatoris potentie parificari non ualeat, regali tamen illi neuticam est inferior prosapia. Et ut breui concludam eloquio, a tributarie seruitutis iugo Danos (mox) emancipabo, nullam prorsus subiectionis reuerentiam uobis exhibitura’”).

[^83]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 59; Gertz, _Scriptores minores historiæ Danicæ_, 114 (“Decus Datie Tyræ”).

[^84]: Sturluson, _Heimskringla_, 7; Stefan Olsson, _The Hostages of the Northmen: From the Viking Age to the Middle Ages_ (Stockholm: Stockholm University Press, 2019), 55-80.

[^85]: Scholz, _Royal Frankish Annals_, 95.

[^86]: Simon Keynes and Michael Lapidge, trans., _Alfred the Great: Asser’s Life of King Alfred and Other Contemporary Sources_ (London: Penguin Books, 1983), 85; Asser, _De rebus gestis Ælfredi_, ed. William Henry Stevenson (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1926), 46 (“nominatos, acceptis, pagani insuper iuraverunt citissime de suo regno exituros, necnon et Godrum, rex eorum, Christianitatem subire et baptismum sub manu Ælfredi regis accipere promisit”).

[^87]: Keynes and Lapidge, _Alfred the Great_, 83; Asser, _De rebus gestis Ælfredi_ (“Sed, more suo, solita fallacia utens, et obsides et iuramentum atque fidem promissam non custodiens, nocte quadam, foedere disrupto, omnes equites, quos habebat, occidit”).

[^88]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 60. This is Aggesen’s only mention of Thyra’s prophetic ability.

[^89]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 60-1.

[^90]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 689 (“Thyra, quo patriam a clandestinis exterorum irruptionibus tutiorem prestaret, quantum a Slesuico ad occidentalem Oceanum patet, vallo fussaque proscindere aggressa est”).

[^91]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 689 (“Eadem quoque, cum sub specie foemine uirilem animum gereret, Scaniam Suetica dominatione compressam prestandi tributi onere liberauit. Itaque hinc muro, inde armis hostem repellens diuersis patrie finibus par tutele beneficium peperit”).

[^92]: Adam of Bremen, _The Archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen_, 50.

[^93]: Scholz, _Royal Frankish Annals_, 88-9; Pertz, _Annales Regni Francorum_, 126 (“soluta classe ad portum, qui Sliesthorp dicitur, cum universo exercitu venit. Ibi per aliquot dies moratus limitem regni sui, qui Saxoniam respicit, vallo munire constituit, eo modo, ut ab orientali maris sinu, quem illi Ostarsalt dicunt, usque ad occidentalem oceanum totam Egidorae fluminis aquilonalem ripam munimentum valli praetexeret, una tantum porta dimissa per quam carra et equites emitti et recipi potuissent”).

[^94]: Astrid Tummuscheit and Frauke Witte, “The Danevirke in the Light of Recent Excavations,” in _The Fortified Viking Age: 36th Interdisciplinary Viking Symposium_, ed. Jesper Hansen and Mette Bruus (Odense: Odense City Museums and University Press of Southern Denmark, 2018), 69-74, at 71.

[^95]: Tummuscheit and Witte, “The Danevirke in the Light of Recent Excavations,” 72.

[^96]: Tummuscheit and Witte, “The Danevirke in the Light of Recent Excavations,” 69.

[^97]: Astrid Tummuscheit and Frauke Witte, “The Danevirke: Preliminary Results of New Excavations (2010-2014) at the Defensive System in the German-Danish Borderland,” _Offa’s Dyke Journal_ (2019):114-36, at 120-1; Finley and Jóhannesdóttir, _The Saga of the Jómsvíkings_, 83.

[^98]: Else Roesdahl, “The Emergence of Denmark and the Reign of Harald Bluetooth,” in _The Viking World_, ed. Stefan Brink and Neil Price (London: Routledge, 2009) 652-64, at 660.

[^99]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 61.

[^100]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 689.

[^101]: Aggesen, “_Brevis historia regum Dacie_,” 61. The significance of this will be discussed in detail in Chapter Two.

[^102]: Saxo, _Gesta Danorum_, 696-7 (“Post hec Thyra, Danice maiestatis caput, absumpta est. Cuius corpus Haraldus amplissimo funere elatum magno cum omnium plangore non longe a patris tumulo sepulture mandauit. Neque enim tam acri iactura cuiusquam penates moeroris expers esse poterant, priuato funere publicam patrie fortunam exspirasse credentes. Vbi nunc quoque sacrarium perspicere est, duorum coniugum socialibus bustis intersitum”).
